The TRIPS Agreement and the Conventions referred to in it 
 
This collection contains the text of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights (the "TRIPS Agreement") as included in Annex 1C of the Marrakesh Agreement 
Establishing the World Trade Organization of 15 April 1994, which entered into force on 
1 January 1995, as well as other relevant legal instruments. 
 
 
The TRIPS Agreement builds on the existing multilateral systems for the protection of the 
various intellectual property rights covered by it, and many substantive provisions of the main 
international instruments for the protection of intellectual property are included in the Agreement.  
These provisions are included by reference, however, and not reproduced as such in the TRIPS 
Agreement.  For the convenience of the reader, the text of the provisions has been included in this 
volume as well, so that they will be available along with the text of the TRIPS Agreement.   
 
 
The instruments explicitly referred to in the Agreement are the Paris Convention for the 
Protection of Industrial Property, notably the Stockholm Act of this Convention of 14 July 1967 (the 
"Paris Convention (1967)"), the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, 
notably the Paris Act of that Convention of 24 July 1971 (the "Berne Convention (1971)"), the 
International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and 
Broadcasting Organizations adopted at Rome on 26 October 1961 (the "Rome Convention") and the 
Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits adopted at Washington on 
26 May 1989 (the "IPIC Treaty" or "Washington Treaty"). The specific Articles of these instruments 
referred to in the TRIPS Agreement are reproduced in this volume, except in the case of the Rome 
Convention, of which all substantive provisions have been included in this volume since, although 
some Articles are explicitly mentioned in the Agreement, many other provisions are included without 
specific reference.    
 
 
The provisions of Articles XXII and XXIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade 1994 and the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes as 
contained in Annex 2 of the Marrakesh Agreement govern the settlement of disputes between 
Members of the World Trade Organization on TRIPS matters.  The Marrakesh Agreement 
Establishing the World Trade Organization includes the institutional provisions relating to the 
functioning of the TRIPS Council within the framework of the World Trade Organization.  These 
texts are available at http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/docs_e.htm.  
 
 
 
 
 
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Pages 
 
AGREEMENT ON TRADE-RELATED ASPECTS OF  
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
3-33 
PARIS CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF  
 
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY  
 
 
STOCKHOLM ACT (1967)  
 
Articles 1 through 12 and 19 
 
34-46 
BERNE CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF  
 
LITERARY AND ARTISTIC WORKS  
 
 
PARIS ACT (1971)  
 
Articles 1 through 21 and Appendix 
 
47-65 
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION  
 
OF PERFORMERS, PRODUCERS OF PHONOGRAMS  
 
AND BROADCASTING ORGANIZATIONS  
 
 
("ROME CONVENTION")  
 
Articles 1 through 22 
 
 
66-72 
TREATY ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN RESPECT OF  
 
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS  
 
 
("WASHINGTON TREATY")  
 
Articles 2 through 7 other than 6(3), 12 and 16(3) 
 
 
73-78 
UNDERSTANDING  ON RULES AND PROCEDURES 
 
GOVERNING THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
 
 
79-100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
THE TRIPS AGREEMENT 
 
 
 
 
AGREEMENT ON TRADE-RELATED ASPECTS OF 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
PART I  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES 
 
PART II 
STANDARDS CONCERNING THE AVAILABILITY, SCOPE  
 
 
AND USE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
 
1. 
Copyright and Related Rights 
 
2. 
Trademarks 
 
3. 
Geographical Indications 
 
4. 
Industrial Designs 
 
5. 
Patents 
 
6. 
Layout-Designs (Topographies) of Integrated Circuits 
 
7. 
Protection of Undisclosed Information 
 
8. 
Control of Anti-Competitive Practices in Contractual Licences 
 
PART III 
ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
 
1. 
General Obligations 
 
2. 
Civil and Administrative Procedures and Remedies 
 
3. 
Provisional Measures 
 
4. 
Special Requirements Related to Border Measures 
 
5. 
Criminal Procedures 
 
PART IV 
ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF INTELLECTUAL  
 
 
PROPERTY RIGHTS AND RELATED INTER-PARTES  
 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
PART V 
DISPUTE PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT 
 
PART VI 
TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
 
PART VII 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS;  FINAL PROVISIONS 
 
 
 
4
AGREEMENT ON TRADE-RELATED ASPECTS OF 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
 
Members, 
 
 
Desiring to reduce distortions and impediments to international trade, and taking into account 
the need to promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual property rights, and to ensure 
that measures and procedures to enforce intellectual property rights do not themselves become 
barriers to legitimate trade; 
 
 
Recognizing, to this end, the need for new rules and disciplines concerning: 
 
(a) 
the applicability of the basic principles of GATT 1994 and of relevant international 
intellectual property agreements or conventions; 
 
(b) 
the provision of adequate standards and principles concerning the availability, scope 
and use of trade-related intellectual property rights; 
 
(c) 
the provision of effective and appropriate means for the enforcement of trade-related 
intellectual property rights, taking into account differences in national legal systems; 
 
(d) 
the provision of effective and expeditious procedures for the multilateral prevention 
and settlement of disputes between governments;  and 
 
(e) 
transitional arrangements aiming at the fullest participation in the results of the 
negotiations; 
 
 
Recognizing the need for a multilateral framework of principles, rules and disciplines dealing 
with international trade in counterfeit goods; 
 
 
Recognizing that intellectual property rights are private rights;   
 
 
Recognizing the underlying public policy objectives of national systems for the protection of 
intellectual property, including developmental and technological objectives; 
 
 
Recognizing also the special needs of the least-developed country Members in respect of 
maximum flexibility in the domestic implementation of laws and regulations in order to enable them 
to create a sound and viable technological base; 
 
 
Emphasizing the importance of reducing tensions by reaching strengthened commitments to 
resolve disputes on trade-related intellectual property issues through multilateral procedures; 
 
 
Desiring to establish a mutually supportive relationship between the WTO and the World 
Intellectual Property Organization (referred to in this Agreement as "WIPO") as well as other relevant 
international organizations; 
 
 
Hereby agree as follows: 
 
 
 
 
5
PART I 
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BASIC PRINCIPLES 
 
 
Article 1 
 
Nature and Scope of Obligations 
 
1. 
Members shall give effect to the provisions of this Agreement.  Members may, but shall not 
be obliged to, implement in their law more extensive protection than is required by this Agreement, 
provided that such protection does not contravene the provisions of this Agreement.  Members shall 
be free to determine the appropriate method of implementing the provisions of this Agreement within 
their own legal system and practice. 
 
2. 
For the purposes of this Agreement, the term "intellectual property" refers to all categories of 
intellectual property that are the subject of Sections 1 through 7 of Part II.   
 
3. 
Members shall accord the treatment provided for in this Agreement to the nationals of other 
Members.1  In respect of the relevant intellectual property right, the nationals of other Members shall 
be understood as those natural or legal persons that would meet the criteria for eligibility for 
protection provided for in the Paris Convention (1967), the Berne Convention (1971), the Rome 
Convention and the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits, were all 
Members of the WTO members of those conventions.2  Any Member availing itself of the 
possibilities provided in paragraph 3 of Article 5 or paragraph 2 of Article 6 of the Rome Convention 
shall make a notification as foreseen in those provisions to the Council for Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (the "Council for TRIPS").    
 
 
Article 2 
 
Intellectual Property Conventions 
 
1. 
In respect of Parts II, III and IV of this Agreement, Members shall comply with Articles 1 
through 12, and Article 19, of the Paris Convention (1967). 
 
2. 
Nothing in Parts I to IV of this Agreement shall derogate from existing obligations that 
Members may have to each other under the Paris Convention, the Berne Convention, the Rome 
Convention and the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits. 
 
                                                      
1 When "nationals" are referred to in this Agreement, they shall be deemed, in the case of a separate 
customs territory Member of the WTO, to mean persons, natural or legal, who are domiciled or who have a real 
and effective industrial or commercial establishment in that customs territory. 
2 In this Agreement, "Paris Convention" refers to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial 
Property;  "Paris Convention (1967)" refers to the Stockholm Act of this Convention of 14 July 1967.  "Berne 
Convention" refers to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works;  "Berne 
Convention (1971)" refers to the Paris Act of this Convention of 24 July 1971.  "Rome Convention" refers to the 
International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting 
Organizations, adopted at Rome on 26 October 1961.  "Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated 
Circuits" (IPIC Treaty) refers to the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits, adopted at 
Washington on 26 May 1989.  "WTO Agreement" refers to the Agreement Establishing the WTO. 
 
 
6
Article 3 
 
National Treatment 
 
1. 
Each Member shall accord to the nationals of other Members treatment no less favourable 
than that it accords to its own nationals with regard to the protection3  of intellectual property, subject 
to the exceptions already provided in, respectively, the Paris Convention (1967), the Berne 
Convention (1971), the Rome Convention or the Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of 
Integrated Circuits.  In respect of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting 
organizations, this obligation only applies in respect of the rights provided under this Agreement.  
Any Member availing itself of the possibilities provided in Article 6 of the Berne Convention (1971) 
or paragraph 1(b) of Article 16 of the Rome Convention shall make a notification as foreseen in those 
provisions to the Council for TRIPS. 
 
2. 
Members may avail themselves of the exceptions permitted under paragraph 1 in relation to 
judicial and administrative procedures, including the designation of an address for service or the 
appointment of an agent within the jurisdiction of a Member, only where such exceptions are 
necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations which are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Agreement and where such practices are not applied in a manner which would 
constitute a disguised restriction on trade. 
 
 
Article 4 
 
Most-Favoured-Nation Treatment 
 
 
With regard to the protection of intellectual property, any advantage, favour, privilege or 
immunity granted by a Member to the nationals of any other country shall be accorded immediately 
and unconditionally to the nationals of all other Members.  Exempted from this obligation are any 
advantage, favour, privilege or immunity accorded by a Member: 
 
(a) 
deriving from international agreements on judicial assistance or law enforcement of a 
general nature and not particularly confined to the protection of intellectual property; 
 
(b) 
granted in accordance with the provisions of the Berne Convention (1971) or the 
Rome Convention authorizing that the treatment accorded be a function not of 
national treatment but of the treatment accorded in another country;   
 
(c) 
in respect of the rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting 
organizations not provided under this Agreement; 
 
(d) 
deriving from international agreements related to the protection of intellectual 
property which entered into force prior to the entry into force of the WTO 
Agreement, provided that such agreements are notified to the Council for TRIPS and 
do not constitute an arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination against nationals of other 
Members. 
 
                                                      
3 For the purposes of Articles 3 and 4, "protection" shall include matters affecting the availability, 
acquisition, scope, maintenance and enforcement of intellectual property rights as well as those matters affecting 
the use of intellectual property rights specifically addressed in this Agreement. 
 
 
7
Article 5 
 
Multilateral Agreements on Acquisition or 
Maintenance of Protection 
 
 
The obligations under Articles 3 and 4 do not apply to procedures provided in multilateral 
agreements concluded under the auspices of WIPO relating to the acquisition or maintenance of 
intellectual property rights. 
 
 
Article 6 
 
Exhaustion 
 
 
For the purposes of dispute settlement under this Agreement, subject to the provisions of 
Articles 3 and 4 nothing in this Agreement shall be used to address the issue of the exhaustion of 
intellectual property rights. 
 
 
Article 7 
 
Objectives 
 
 
The protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights should contribute to the 
promotion of technological innovation and to the transfer and dissemination of technology, to the 
mutual advantage of producers and users of technological knowledge and in a manner conducive to 
social and economic welfare, and to a balance of rights and obligations. 
 
 
Article 8 
 
Principles 
 
1. 
Members may, in formulating or amending their laws and regulations, adopt measures 
necessary to protect public health and nutrition, and to promote the public interest in sectors of vital 
importance to their socio-economic and technological development, provided that such measures are 
consistent with the provisions of this Agreement.   
 
2. 
Appropriate measures, provided that they are consistent with the provisions of this 
Agreement, may be needed to prevent the abuse of intellectual property rights by right holders or the 
resort to practices which unreasonably restrain trade or adversely affect the international transfer of 
technology.  
 
 
 
8
PART II 
 
STANDARDS CONCERNING THE AVAILABILITY, SCOPE 
AND USE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
SECTION 1:  COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS 
 
 
Article 9 
 
Relation to the Berne Convention 
 
1. 
Members shall comply with Articles 1 through 21 of the Berne Convention (1971) and the 
Appendix thereto.  However, Members shall not have rights or obligations under this Agreement in 
respect of the rights conferred under Article 6bis of that Convention or of the rights derived 
therefrom. 
 
2. 
Copyright protection shall extend to expressions and not to ideas, procedures, methods of 
operation or mathematical concepts as such. 
 
 
Article 10 
 
Computer Programs and Compilations of Data 
 
1. 
Computer programs, whether in source or object code, shall be protected as literary works 
under the Berne Convention (1971). 
 
2. 
Compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable or other form, which by 
reason of the selection or arrangement of their contents constitute intellectual creations shall be 
protected as such.  Such protection, which shall not extend to the data or material itself, shall be 
without prejudice to any copyright subsisting in the data or material itself. 
 
 
Article 11 
 
Rental Rights 
 
 
In respect of at least computer programs and cinematographic works, a Member shall provide 
authors and their successors in title the right to authorize or to prohibit the commercial rental to the 
public of originals or copies of their copyright works.  A Member shall be excepted from this 
obligation in respect of cinematographic works unless such rental has led to widespread copying of 
such works which is materially impairing the exclusive right of reproduction conferred in that 
Member on authors and their successors in title.  In respect of computer programs, this obligation 
does not apply to rentals where the program itself is not the essential object of the rental. 
 
 
Article 12 
 
Term of Protection 
 
 
Whenever the term of protection of a work, other than a photographic work or a work of 
applied art, is calculated on a basis other than the life of a natural person, such term shall be no less 
than 50 years from the end of the calendar year of authorized publication, or, failing such authorized 
publication within 50 years from the making of the work, 50 years from the end of the calendar year 
of making. 
 
 
 
9
 
Article 13 
 
Limitations and Exceptions 
 
 
Members shall confine limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to certain special cases 
which do not conflict with a normal exploitation of the work and do not unreasonably prejudice the 
legitimate interests of the right holder.   
 
 
Article 14 
 
Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms 
(Sound Recordings) and Broadcasting Organizations 
 
1. 
In respect of a fixation of their performance on a phonogram, performers shall have the 
possibility of preventing the following acts when undertaken without their authorization:  the fixation 
of their unfixed performance and the reproduction of such fixation.  Performers shall also have the 
possibility of preventing the following acts when undertaken without their authorization:  the 
broadcasting by wireless means and the communication to the public of their live performance. 
 
2. 
Producers of phonograms shall enjoy the right to authorize or prohibit the direct or indirect 
reproduction of their phonograms. 
 
3. 
Broadcasting organizations shall have the right to prohibit the following acts when 
undertaken without their authorization:  the fixation, the reproduction of fixations, and the 
rebroadcasting by wireless means of broadcasts, as well as the communication to the public of 
television broadcasts of the same.  Where Members do not grant such rights to broadcasting 
organizations, they shall provide owners of copyright in the subject matter of broadcasts with the 
possibility of preventing the above acts, subject to the provisions of the Berne Convention (1971). 
 
4. 
The provisions of Article 11 in respect of computer programs shall apply mutatis mutandis to 
producers of phonograms and any other right holders in phonograms as determined in a Member's 
law.  If on 15 April 1994 a Member has in force a system of equitable remuneration of right holders in 
respect of the rental of phonograms, it may maintain such system provided that the commercial rental 
of phonograms is not giving rise to the material impairment of the exclusive rights of reproduction of 
right holders.   
 
5. 
The term of the protection available under this Agreement to performers and producers of 
phonograms shall last at least until the end of a period of 50 years computed from the end of the 
calendar year in which the fixation was made or the performance took place.  The term of protection 
granted pursuant to paragraph 3 shall last for at least 20 years from the end of the calendar year in 
which the broadcast took place. 
 
6. 
Any Member may, in relation to the rights conferred under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, provide for 
conditions, limitations, exceptions and reservations to the extent permitted by the Rome Convention.  
However, the provisions of Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971) shall also apply, 
mutatis mutandis, to the rights of performers and producers of phonograms in phonograms. 
 
 
 
10
SECTION 2:  TRADEMARKS 
 
 
Article 15 
 
Protectable Subject Matter 
 
1. 
Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one 
undertaking from those of other undertakings, shall be capable of constituting a trademark.  Such 
signs, in particular words including personal names, letters, numerals, figurative elements and 
combinations of colours as well as any combination of such signs, shall be eligible for registration as 
trademarks.  Where signs are not inherently capable of distinguishing the relevant goods or services, 
Members may make registrability depend on distinctiveness acquired through use.  Members may 
require, as a condition of registration, that signs be visually perceptible. 
 
2. 
Paragraph 1 shall not be understood to prevent a Member from denying registration of a 
trademark on other grounds, provided that they do not derogate from the provisions of the Paris 
Convention (1967).   
 
3. 
Members may make registrability depend on use.  However, actual use of a trademark shall 
not be a condition for filing an application for registration.   An application shall not be refused solely 
on the ground that intended use has not taken place before the expiry of a period of three years from 
the date of application. 
 
4. 
The nature of the goods or services to which a trademark is to be applied shall in no case form 
an obstacle to registration of the trademark. 
 
5. 
Members shall publish each trademark either before it is registered or promptly after it is 
registered and shall afford a reasonable opportunity for petitions to cancel the registration.  In 
addition, Members may afford an opportunity for the registration of a trademark to be opposed. 
 
 
Article 16 
 
Rights Conferred 
 
1. 
The owner of a registered trademark shall have the exclusive right to prevent all third parties 
not having the owner’s consent from using in the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods 
or services which are identical or similar to those in respect of which the trademark is registered 
where such use would result in a likelihood of confusion.  In case of the use of an identical sign for 
identical goods or services, a likelihood of confusion shall be presumed.  The rights described above 
shall not prejudice any existing prior rights, nor shall they affect the possibility of Members making 
rights available on the basis of use. 
 
2. 
Article 6bis of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to services.  In 
determining whether a trademark is well-known, Members shall take account of the knowledge of the 
trademark in the relevant sector of the public, including knowledge in the Member concerned which 
has been obtained as a result of the promotion of the trademark. 
 
3. 
Article 6bis of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to goods or 
services which are not similar to those in respect of which a trademark is registered, provided that use 
of that trademark in relation to those goods or services would indicate a connection between those 
goods or services and the owner of the registered trademark and provided that the interests of the 
owner of the registered trademark are likely to be damaged by such use. 
 
 
 
11
Article 17 
 
Exceptions 
 
 
Members may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a trademark, such as fair 
use of descriptive terms, provided that such exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the 
owner of the trademark and of third parties. 
 
 
Article 18 
 
Term of Protection 
 
 
Initial registration, and each renewal of registration, of a trademark shall be for a term of no 
less than seven years.  The registration of a trademark shall be renewable indefinitely. 
 
 
Article 19 
 
Requirement of Use 
 
1. 
If use is required to maintain a registration, the registration may be cancelled only after an 
uninterrupted period of at least three years of non-use, unless valid reasons based on the existence of 
obstacles to such use are shown by the trademark owner.  Circumstances arising independently of the 
will of the owner of the trademark which constitute an obstacle to the use of the trademark, such as 
import restrictions on or other government requirements for goods or services protected by the 
trademark, shall be recognized as valid reasons for non-use. 
 
2. 
When subject to the control of its owner, use of a trademark by another person shall be 
recognized as use of the trademark for the purpose of maintaining the registration. 
 
 
Article 20 
 
Other Requirements 
 
 
The use of a trademark in the course of trade shall not be unjustifiably encumbered by special 
requirements, such as use with another trademark, use in a special form or use in a manner detrimental 
to its capability to distinguish the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other 
undertakings. This will not preclude a requirement prescribing the use of the trademark identifying the 
undertaking producing the goods or services along with, but without linking it to, the trademark 
distinguishing the specific goods or services in question of that undertaking. 
 
 
Article 21 
 
Licensing and Assignment 
 
 
Members may determine conditions on the licensing and assignment of trademarks, it being 
understood that the compulsory licensing of trademarks shall not be permitted and that the owner of a 
registered trademark shall have the right to assign the trademark with or without the transfer of the 
business to which the trademark belongs.   
 
 
 
12
SECTION 3:  GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS 
 
 
Article 22 
 
Protection of Geographical Indications 
 
1. 
Geographical indications are, for the purposes of this Agreement, indications which identify a 
good as originating in the territory of a Member, or a region or locality in that territory, where a given 
quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical 
origin. 
 
2. 
In respect of geographical indications, Members shall provide the legal means for interested 
parties to prevent:   
 
(a) 
the use of any means in the designation or presentation of a good that indicates or 
suggests that the good in question originates in a geographical area other than the true 
place of origin in a manner which misleads the public as to the geographical origin of 
the good; 
 
(b) 
any use which constitutes an act of unfair competition within the meaning of 
Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967). 
 
3. 
A Member shall, ex officio if its legislation so permits or at the request of an interested party, 
refuse or invalidate the registration of a trademark which contains or consists of a geographical 
indication with respect to goods not originating in the territory indicated, if use of the indication in the 
trademark for such goods in that Member is of such a nature as to mislead the public as to the true 
place of origin. 
 
4. 
The protection under paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall be applicable against a geographical 
indication which, although literally true as to the territory, region or locality in which the goods 
originate, falsely represents to the public that the goods originate in another territory. 
 
 
Article 23 
 
Additional Protection for Geographical Indications  
for Wines and Spirits 
 
1. 
Each Member shall provide the legal means for interested parties to prevent use of a 
geographical indication identifying wines for wines not originating in the place indicated by the 
geographical indication in question or identifying spirits for spirits not originating in the place 
indicated by the geographical indication in question, even where the true origin of the goods is 
indicated or the geographical indication is used in translation or accompanied by expressions such as 
"kind", "type", "style", "imitation" or the like.4 
 
2. 
The registration of a trademark for wines which contains or consists of a geographical 
indication identifying wines or for spirits which contains or consists of a geographical indication 
identifying spirits shall be refused or invalidated, ex officio if a Member's legislation so permits or at 
the request of an interested party, with respect to such wines or spirits not having this origin. 
 
3. 
In the case of homonymous geographical indications for wines, protection shall be accorded 
to each indication, subject to the provisions of paragraph 4 of Article 22. Each Member shall 
determine the practical conditions under which the homonymous indications in question will be 
                                                      
4 Notwithstanding the first sentence of Article 42, Members may, with respect to these obligations, 
instead provide for enforcement by administrative action. 
 
 
13
differentiated from each other, taking into account the need to ensure equitable treatment of the 
producers concerned and that consumers are not misled. 
 
4. 
In order to facilitate the protection of geographical indications for wines, negotiations shall be 
undertaken in the Council for TRIPS concerning the establishment of a multilateral system of 
notification and registration of geographical indications for wines eligible for protection in those 
Members participating in the system. 
 
 
Article 24 
 
International Negotiations;  Exceptions 
 
1. 
Members agree to enter into negotiations aimed at increasing the protection of individual 
geographical indications under Article 23.  The provisions of paragraphs 4 through 8 below shall not 
be used by a Member to refuse to conduct negotiations or to conclude bilateral or multilateral 
agreements.  In the context of such negotiations, Members shall be willing to consider the continued 
applicability of these provisions to individual geographical indications whose use was the subject of 
such negotiations. 
 
2. 
The Council for TRIPS shall keep under review the application of the provisions of this 
Section;  the first such review shall take place within two years of the entry into force of the WTO 
Agreement.  Any matter affecting the compliance with the obligations under these provisions may be 
drawn to the attention of the Council, which, at the request of a Member, shall consult with any 
Member or Members in respect of such matter in respect of which it has not been possible to find a 
satisfactory solution through bilateral or plurilateral consultations between the Members concerned.  
The Council shall take such action as may be agreed to facilitate the operation and further the 
objectives of this Section. 
 
3. 
In implementing this Section, a Member shall not diminish the protection of geographical 
indications that existed in that Member immediately prior to the date of entry into force of the WTO 
Agreement. 
 
4. 
Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to prevent continued and similar use of a 
particular geographical indication of another Member identifying wines or spirits in connection with 
goods or services by any of its nationals or domiciliaries who have used that geographical indication 
in a continuous manner with regard to the same or related goods or services in the territory of that 
Member either (a) for at least 10 years preceding 15 April 1994 or (b) in good faith preceding that 
date. 
 
5. 
Where a trademark has been applied for or registered in good faith, or where rights to a 
trademark have been acquired through use in good faith either: 
 
(a) 
before the date of application of these provisions in that Member as defined in 
Part VI;  or 
 
(b) 
before the geographical indication is protected in its country of origin;   
 
measures adopted to implement this Section shall not prejudice eligibility for or the validity of the 
registration of a trademark, or the right to use a trademark, on the basis that such a trademark is 
identical with, or similar to, a geographical indication. 
 
6. 
Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to apply its provisions in respect of a 
geographical indication of any other Member with respect to goods or services for which the relevant 
indication is identical with the term customary in common language as the common name for such 
goods or services in the territory of that Member.  Nothing in this Section shall require a Member to 
apply its provisions in respect of a geographical indication of any other Member with respect to 
 
 
14
products of the vine for which the relevant indication is identical with the customary name of a grape 
variety existing in the territory of that Member as of the date of entry into force of the WTO 
Agreement. 
 
7. 
A Member may provide that any request made under this Section in connection with the use 
or registration of a trademark must be presented within five years after the adverse use of the 
protected indication has become generally known in that Member or after the date of registration of 
the trademark in that Member provided that the trademark has been published by that date, if such 
date is earlier than the date on which the adverse use became generally known in that Member, 
provided that the geographical indication is not used or registered in bad faith. 
 
8. 
The provisions of this Section shall in no way prejudice the right of any person to use, in the 
course of trade, that person’s name or the name of that person’s predecessor in business, except where 
such name is used in such a manner as to mislead the public. 
 
9. 
There shall be no obligation under this Agreement to protect geographical indications which 
are not or cease to be protected in their country of origin, or which have fallen into disuse in that 
country. 
 
 
SECTION 4:  INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS 
 
 
Article 25 
 
Requirements for Protection 
 
1. 
Members shall provide for the protection of independently created industrial designs that are 
new or original.  Members may provide that designs are not new or original if they do not 
significantly differ from known designs or combinations of known design features.  Members may 
provide that such protection shall not extend to designs dictated essentially by technical or functional 
considerations. 
 
2. 
Each Member shall ensure that requirements for securing protection for textile designs, in 
particular in regard to any cost, examination or publication, do not unreasonably impair the 
opportunity to seek and obtain such protection.  Members shall be free to meet this obligation through 
industrial design law or through copyright law. 
 
 
Article 26 
 
Protection 
 
1. 
The owner of a protected industrial design shall have the right to prevent third parties not 
having the owner’s consent from making, selling or importing articles bearing or embodying a design 
which is a copy, or substantially a copy, of the protected design, when such acts are undertaken for 
commercial purposes.  
 
2. 
Members may provide limited exceptions to the protection of industrial designs, provided that 
such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with the normal exploitation of protected industrial 
designs and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the owner of the protected 
design, taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties. 
 
3. 
The duration of protection available shall amount to at least 10 years. 
 
 
 
15
SECTION 5:  PATENTS 
 
 
Article 27 
 
Patentable Subject Matter 
 
1. 
Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, patents shall be available for any inventions, 
whether products or processes, in all fields of technology, provided that they are new, involve an 
inventive step and are capable of industrial application.5  Subject to paragraph 4 of Article 65, 
paragraph 8 of Article 70 and paragraph 3 of this Article, patents shall be available and patent rights 
enjoyable without discrimination as to the place of invention, the field of technology and whether 
products are imported or locally produced. 
 
2. 
Members may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention within their territory of 
the commercial exploitation of which is necessary to protect ordre public or morality, including to 
protect human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment, 
provided that such exclusion is not made merely because the exploitation is prohibited by their law. 
 
3. 
Members may also exclude from patentability: 
 
(a) 
diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment of humans or animals; 
 
(b) 
plants and animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially biological processes 
for the production of plants or animals other than non-biological and microbiological 
processes.  However,  Members shall provide for the protection of plant varieties 
either by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any combination thereof.  
The provisions of this subparagraph shall be reviewed four years after the date of 
entry into force of the WTO Agreement. 
 
 
Article 28 
 
Rights Conferred 
 
1. 
A patent shall confer on its owner the following exclusive rights: 
 
(a) 
where the subject matter of a patent is a product, to prevent third parties not having 
the owner’s consent from the acts of:  making, using, offering for sale, selling, or 
importing6  for these purposes that product; 
 
 
(b) 
where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to prevent third parties not having 
the owner’s consent from the act of using the process, and from the acts of:  using, 
offering for sale, selling, or importing for these purposes at least the product obtained 
directly by that process. 
 
2. 
Patent owners shall also have the right to assign, or transfer by succession, the patent and to 
conclude licensing contracts. 
 
                                                      
5 For the purposes of this Article, the terms "inventive step" and "capable of industrial application" may 
be deemed by a Member to be synonymous with the terms "non-obvious" and "useful" respectively. 
6 This right, like all other rights conferred under this Agreement in respect of the use, sale, importation 
or other distribution of goods, is subject to the provisions of Article 6. 
 
 
16
Article  29 
 
Conditions on Patent Applicants 
 
1. 
Members shall require that an applicant for a patent shall disclose the invention in a manner 
sufficiently clear and complete for the invention to be carried out by a person skilled in the art and 
may require the applicant to indicate the best mode for carrying out the invention known to the 
inventor at the filing date or, where priority is claimed, at the priority date of the application. 
 
2. 
Members may require an applicant for a patent to provide information concerning the 
applicant’s corresponding foreign applications and grants. 
 
 
Article 30 
 
Exceptions to Rights Conferred 
 
 
Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights conferred by a patent, 
provided that such exceptions do not unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent 
and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner, taking account of the 
legitimate interests of third parties. 
 
 
Article 31 
 
Other Use Without Authorization of the Right Holder 
 
 
Where the law of a Member allows for other use7  of the subject matter of a patent without the 
authorization of the right holder, including use by the government or third parties authorized by the 
government, the following provisions shall be respected: 
 
(a) 
authorization of such use shall be considered on its individual merits; 
 
(b) 
such use may only be permitted if, prior to such use, the proposed user has made 
efforts to obtain authorization from the right holder on reasonable commercial terms 
and conditions and that such efforts have not been successful within a reasonable 
period of time.  This requirement may be waived by a Member in the case of a 
national emergency or other circumstances of extreme urgency or in cases of public 
non-commercial use.  In situations of national emergency or other circumstances of 
extreme urgency, the right holder shall, nevertheless, be notified as soon as 
reasonably practicable.  In the case of public non-commercial use, where the 
government or contractor, without making a patent search, knows or has 
demonstrable grounds to know that a valid patent is or will be used by or for the 
government, the right holder shall be informed promptly; 
 
(c) 
the scope and duration of such use shall be limited to the purpose for which it was 
authorized, and in the case of semi-conductor technology shall only be for public 
non-commercial use or to remedy a practice determined after judicial or 
administrative process to be anti-competitive; 
 
(d) 
such use shall be non-exclusive; 
 
(e) 
such use shall be non-assignable, except with that part of the enterprise or goodwill 
which enjoys such use; 
 
                                                      
7 "Other use" refers to use other than that allowed under Article 30. 
 
 
17
(f) 
any such use shall be authorized predominantly for the supply of the domestic market 
of the Member authorizing such use; 
 
(g) 
authorization for such use shall be liable, subject to adequate protection of the 
legitimate interests of the persons so authorized, to be terminated if and when the 
circumstances which led to it cease to exist and are unlikely to recur.  The competent 
authority shall have the authority to review, upon motivated request, the continued 
existence of these circumstances; 
 
(h) 
the right holder shall be paid adequate remuneration in the circumstances of each 
case, taking into account the economic value of the authorization; 
 
(i) 
the legal validity of any decision relating to the authorization of such use shall be 
subject to judicial review or other independent review by a distinct higher authority in 
that Member; 
 
(j) 
any decision relating to the remuneration provided in respect of such use shall be 
subject to judicial review or other independent review by a distinct higher authority in 
that Member; 
 
(k) 
Members are not obliged to apply the conditions set forth in subparagraphs (b) and (f) 
where such use is permitted to remedy a practice determined after judicial or 
administrative process to be anti-competitive.  The need to correct anti-competitive 
practices may be taken into account in determining the amount of remuneration in 
such cases.  Competent authorities shall have the authority to refuse termination of 
authorization if and when the conditions which led to such authorization are likely to 
recur; 
 
(l) 
where such use is authorized to permit the exploitation of a patent ("the second 
patent") which cannot be exploited without infringing another patent ("the first 
patent"), the following additional conditions shall apply: 
 
(i) 
the invention claimed in the second patent shall involve an important 
technical advance of considerable economic significance in relation to the 
invention claimed in the first patent; 
 
(ii) 
the owner of the first patent shall be entitled to a cross-licence on reasonable 
terms to use the invention claimed in the second patent;  and 
 
(iii) 
the use authorized in respect of the first patent shall be non-
assignable except with the assignment of the second patent. 
 
 
Article 32 
 
Revocation/Forfeiture 
 
 
An opportunity for judicial review of any decision to revoke or forfeit a patent shall be 
available. 
 
 
 
18
Article 33 
 
Term of Protection 
 
 
The term of protection available shall not end before the expiration of a period of twenty 
years counted from the filing date.8 
 
 
Article 34 
 
Process Patents:  Burden of Proof 
 
1. 
For the purposes of civil proceedings in respect of the infringement of the rights of the owner 
referred to in paragraph 1(b) of Article 28, if the subject matter of a patent is a process for obtaining a 
product, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the defendant to prove that the 
process to obtain an identical product is different from the patented process.  Therefore, Members 
shall provide, in at least one of the following circumstances, that any identical product when produced 
without the consent of the patent owner shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be deemed to 
have been obtained by the patented process: 
 
(a) 
if the product obtained by the patented process is new; 
 
(b) 
if there is a substantial likelihood that the identical product was made by the process 
and the owner of the patent has been unable through reasonable efforts to determine 
the process actually used. 
 
2. 
Any Member shall be free to provide that the burden of proof indicated in paragraph 1 shall 
be on the alleged infringer only if the condition referred to in subparagraph (a) is fulfilled or only if 
the condition referred to in subparagraph (b) is fulfilled. 
 
3. 
In the adduction of proof to the contrary, the legitimate interests of defendants in protecting 
their manufacturing and business secrets shall be taken into account.   
 
 
SECTION 6:  LAYOUT-DESIGNS (TOPOGRAPHIES) OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 
 
 
Article 35 
 
Relation to the IPIC Treaty 
 
 
Members agree to provide protection to the layout-designs (topographies) of integrated 
circuits (referred to in this Agreement as "layout-designs") in accordance with Articles 2 through 7 
(other than paragraph 3 of Article 6), Article 12 and paragraph 3 of Article 16 of the Treaty on 
Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits and, in addition, to comply with the following 
provisions. 
 
 
Article 36 
 
Scope of the Protection 
 
 
Subject to the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 37, Members shall consider unlawful the 
following acts if performed without the authorization of the right holder:9   importing, selling, or 
                                                      
8 It is understood that those Members which do not have a system of original grant may provide that the 
term of protection shall be computed from the filing date in the system of original grant. 
 
 
19
otherwise distributing for commercial purposes a protected layout-design, an integrated circuit in 
which a protected layout-design is incorporated, or an article incorporating such an integrated circuit 
only in so far as it continues to contain an unlawfully reproduced layout-design. 
 
 
Article 37 
 
Acts Not Requiring the Authorization of the Right Holder 
 
1. 
Notwithstanding Article 36, no Member shall consider unlawful the performance of any of 
the acts referred to in that Article in respect of an integrated circuit incorporating an unlawfully 
reproduced layout-design or any article incorporating such an integrated circuit where the person 
performing or ordering such acts did not know and had no reasonable ground to know, when 
acquiring the integrated circuit or article incorporating such an integrated circuit, that it incorporated 
an unlawfully reproduced layout-design.  Members shall provide that, after the time that such person 
has received sufficient notice that the layout-design was unlawfully reproduced, that person may 
perform any of the acts with respect to the stock on hand or ordered before such time, but shall be 
liable to pay to the right holder a sum equivalent to a reasonable royalty such as would be payable 
under a freely negotiated licence in respect of such a layout-design. 
 
2. 
The conditions set out in subparagraphs (a) through (k) of Article 31 shall apply mutatis 
mutandis in the event of any non-voluntary licensing of a layout-design or of its use by or for the 
government without the authorization of the right holder. 
 
 
Article 38 
 
Term of Protection 
 
1. 
In Members requiring registration as a condition of protection, the term of protection of 
layout-designs shall not end before the expiration of a period of 10 years counted from the date of 
filing an application for registration or from the first commercial exploitation wherever in the world it 
occurs. 
 
2. 
In Members not requiring registration as a condition for protection, layout-designs shall be 
protected for a term of no less than 10 years from the date of the first commercial exploitation 
wherever in the world it occurs. 
 
3. 
Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, a Member may provide that protection shall lapse 15 
years after the creation of the layout-design. 
 
 
SECTION 7:  PROTECTION OF UNDISCLOSED INFORMATION  
 
 
Article 39 
 
1. 
In the course of ensuring effective protection against unfair competition as provided in 
Article 10bis of the Paris Convention (1967), Members shall protect undisclosed information in 
accordance with paragraph 2 and data submitted to governments or governmental agencies in 
accordance with paragraph 3. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                     
9 The term "right holder" in this Section shall be understood as having the same meaning as the term 
"holder of the right" in the IPIC Treaty. 
 
 
20
2. 
Natural and legal persons shall have the possibility of preventing information lawfully within 
their control from being disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others without their consent in a manner 
contrary to honest commercial practices10 so long as such information: 
 
(a) 
is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and 
assembly of its components, generally known among or readily accessible to persons 
within the circles that normally deal with the kind of information in question;  
 
(b) 
has commercial value because it is secret;  and  
 
(c) 
has been subject to reasonable steps under the circumstances, by the person lawfully 
in control of the information, to keep it secret. 
 
3. 
Members, when requiring, as a condition of approving the marketing of pharmaceutical or of 
agricultural chemical products which utilize new chemical entities, the submission of undisclosed test 
or other data, the origination of which involves a considerable effort, shall protect such data against 
unfair commercial use.  In addition, Members shall protect such data against disclosure, except where 
necessary to protect the public, or unless steps are taken to ensure that the data are protected against 
unfair commercial use. 
 
 
SECTION 8:  CONTROL OF ANTI-COMPETITIVE PRACTICES  
IN CONTRACTUAL LICENCES 
 
 
Article 40 
 
1. 
Members agree that some licensing practices or conditions pertaining to intellectual property 
rights which restrain competition may have adverse effects on trade and may impede the transfer and 
dissemination of technology. 
 
2. 
Nothing in this Agreement shall prevent Members from specifying in their legislation 
licensing practices or conditions that may in particular cases constitute an abuse of intellectual 
property rights having an adverse effect on competition in the relevant market.  As provided above, a 
Member may adopt, consistently with the other provisions of this Agreement, appropriate measures to 
prevent or control such practices, which may include for example exclusive grantback conditions, 
conditions preventing challenges to validity and coercive package licensing, in the light of the 
relevant laws and regulations of that Member. 
 
3. 
Each Member shall enter, upon request, into consultations with any other Member which has 
cause to believe that an intellectual property right owner that is a national or domiciliary of the 
Member to which the request for consultations has been addressed is undertaking practices in 
violation of the requesting Member's laws and regulations on the subject matter of this Section, and 
which wishes to secure compliance with such legislation, without prejudice to any action under the 
law and to the full freedom of an ultimate decision of either Member.  The Member addressed shall 
accord full and sympathetic consideration to, and shall afford adequate opportunity for, consultations 
with the requesting Member, and shall cooperate through supply of publicly available non-
confidential information of relevance to the matter in question and of other information available to 
the Member, subject to domestic law and to the conclusion of mutually satisfactory agreements 
concerning the safeguarding of its confidentiality by the requesting Member. 
 
                                                      
10 For the purpose of this provision, "a manner contrary to honest commercial practices" shall mean at 
least practices such as breach of contract, breach of confidence and inducement to breach, and includes the 
acquisition of undisclosed information by third parties who knew, or were grossly negligent in failing to know, 
that such practices were involved in the acquisition. 
 
 
21
4. 
A Member whose nationals or domiciliaries are subject to proceedings in another Member 
concerning alleged violation of that other Member's laws and regulations on the subject matter of this 
Section shall, upon request, be granted an opportunity for consultations by the other Member under 
the same conditions as those foreseen in paragraph 3.  
 
 
PART III 
 
ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
 
SECTION 1:  GENERAL OBLIGATIONS 
 
 
Article 41 
 
1. 
Members shall ensure that enforcement procedures as specified in this Part are available 
under their law so as to permit effective action against any act of infringement of intellectual property 
rights covered by this Agreement, including expeditious remedies to prevent infringements and 
remedies which constitute a deterrent to further infringements.  These procedures shall be applied in 
such a manner as to avoid the creation of barriers to legitimate trade and to provide for safeguards 
against their abuse. 
 
2. 
Procedures concerning the enforcement of intellectual property rights shall be fair and 
equitable.  They shall not be unnecessarily complicated or costly, or entail unreasonable time-limits or 
unwarranted delays. 
 
3. 
Decisions on the merits of a case shall preferably be in writing and reasoned.  They shall be 
made available at least to the parties to the proceeding without undue delay.  Decisions on the merits 
of a case shall be based only on evidence in respect of which parties were offered the opportunity to 
be heard. 
 
4. 
Parties to a proceeding shall have an opportunity for review by a judicial authority of final 
administrative decisions and, subject to jurisdictional provisions in a Member's law concerning the 
importance of a case, of at least the legal aspects of initial judicial decisions on the merits of a case.  
However, there shall be no obligation to provide an opportunity for review of acquittals in criminal 
cases. 
 
5. 
It is understood that this Part does not create any obligation to put in place a judicial system 
for the enforcement of intellectual property rights distinct from that for the enforcement of law in 
general, nor does it affect the capacity of Members to enforce their law in general.  Nothing in this 
Part creates any obligation with respect to the distribution of resources as between enforcement of 
intellectual property rights and the enforcement of law in general. 
 
SECTION 2:  CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND REMEDIES 
 
 
Article 42 
 
Fair and Equitable Procedures 
 
 
Members shall make available to right holders11  civil judicial procedures concerning the 
enforcement of any intellectual property right covered by this Agreement.  Defendants shall have the 
right to written notice which is timely and contains sufficient detail, including the basis of the claims.  
                                                      
11 For the purpose of this Part, the term "right holder" includes federations and associations having 
legal standing to assert such rights. 
 
 
22
Parties shall be allowed to be represented by independent legal counsel, and procedures shall not 
impose overly burdensome requirements concerning mandatory personal appearances.  All parties to 
such procedures shall be duly entitled to substantiate their claims and to present all relevant evidence.  
The procedure shall provide a means to identify and protect confidential information, unless this 
would be contrary to existing constitutional requirements. 
 
 
Article 43 
 
Evidence 
 
1. 
The judicial authorities shall have the authority, where a party has presented reasonably 
available evidence sufficient to support its claims and has specified evidence relevant to substantiation 
of its claims which lies in the control of the opposing party, to order that this evidence be produced by 
the opposing party, subject in appropriate cases to conditions which ensure the protection of 
confidential information.  
 
2. 
In cases in which a party to a proceeding voluntarily and without good reason refuses access 
to, or otherwise does not provide necessary information within a reasonable period, or significantly 
impedes a procedure relating to an enforcement action, a Member may accord judicial authorities the 
authority to make preliminary and final determinations, affirmative or negative, on the basis of the 
information presented to them, including the complaint or the allegation presented by the party 
adversely affected by the denial of access to information, subject to providing the parties an 
opportunity to be heard on the allegations or evidence. 
 
 
Article 44 
 
Injunctions 
 
1. 
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order a party to desist from an 
infringement, inter alia to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of 
imported goods that involve the infringement of an intellectual property right, immediately after 
customs clearance of such goods.  Members are not obliged to accord such authority in respect of 
protected subject matter acquired or ordered by a person prior to knowing or having reasonable 
grounds to know that dealing in such subject matter would entail the infringement of an intellectual 
property right.   
 
2. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Part and provided that the provisions of Part II 
specifically addressing use by governments, or by third parties authorized by a government, without 
the authorization of the right holder are complied with, Members may limit the remedies available 
against such use to payment of remuneration in accordance with subparagraph (h) of Article 31.  In 
other cases, the remedies under this Part shall apply or, where these remedies are inconsistent with a 
Member's law, declaratory judgments and adequate compensation shall be available. 
 
 
Article 45 
 
Damages 
 
1. 
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right holder 
damages adequate to compensate for the injury the right holder has suffered because of an 
infringement of that person’s intellectual property right by an infringer who knowingly, or with 
reasonable grounds to know, engaged in infringing activity. 
 
2. 
The judicial authorities shall also have the authority to order the infringer to pay the right 
holder expenses, which may include appropriate attorney's fees.  In appropriate cases, Members may 
 
 
23
authorize the judicial authorities to order recovery of profits and/or payment of pre-established 
damages even where the infringer did not knowingly, or with reasonable grounds to know, engage in 
infringing activity. 
 
 
Article 46 
 
Other Remedies 
 
 
In order to create an effective deterrent to infringement, the judicial authorities shall have the 
authority to order that goods that they have found to be infringing be, without compensation of any 
sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to avoid any harm caused to 
the right holder, or, unless this would be contrary to existing constitutional requirements, destroyed.  
The judicial authorities shall also have the authority to order that materials and implements the 
predominant use of which has been in the creation of the infringing goods be, without compensation 
of any sort, disposed of outside the channels of commerce in such a manner as to minimize the risks 
of further infringements.  In considering such requests, the need for proportionality between the 
seriousness of the infringement and the remedies ordered as well as the interests of third parties shall 
be taken into account.  In regard to counterfeit trademark goods, the simple removal of the trademark 
unlawfully affixed shall not be sufficient, other than in exceptional cases, to permit release of the 
goods into the channels of commerce. 
 
 
Article 47 
 
Right of Information 
 
 
Members may provide that the judicial authorities shall have the authority, unless this would 
be out of proportion to the seriousness of the infringement, to order the infringer to inform the right 
holder of the identity of third persons involved in the production and distribution of the infringing 
goods or services and of their channels of distribution.   
 
 
Article 48 
 
Indemnification of the Defendant 
 
1. 
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order a party at whose request measures 
were taken and who has abused enforcement procedures to provide to a party wrongfully enjoined or 
restrained adequate compensation for the injury suffered because of such abuse.  The judicial 
authorities shall also have the authority to order the applicant to pay the defendant expenses, which 
may include appropriate attorney's fees. 
 
2. 
In respect of the administration of any law pertaining to the protection or enforcement of 
intellectual property rights, Members shall only exempt both public authorities and officials from 
liability to appropriate remedial measures where actions are taken or intended in good faith in the 
course of the administration of that law. 
 
 
Article 49 
 
Administrative Procedures 
 
 
To the extent that any civil remedy can be ordered as a result of administrative procedures on 
the merits of a case, such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in substance to those set 
forth in this Section. 
 
 
 
24
 
SECTION 3:  PROVISIONAL MEASURES 
 
 
Article 50 
 
1. 
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to order prompt and effective provisional 
measures: 
 
(a) 
to prevent an infringement of any intellectual property right from occurring, and in 
particular to prevent the entry into the channels of commerce in their jurisdiction of 
goods, including imported goods immediately after customs clearance; 
 
(b) 
to preserve relevant evidence in regard to the alleged infringement. 
 
2. 
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to adopt provisional measures inaudita altera 
parte where appropriate, in particular where any delay is likely to cause irreparable harm to the right 
holder, or where there is a demonstrable risk of evidence being destroyed.  
 
3. 
The judicial authorities shall have the authority to require the applicant to provide any 
reasonably available evidence in order to satisfy themselves with a sufficient degree of certainty that 
the applicant is the right holder and that the applicant’s right is being infringed or that such 
infringement is imminent, and to order the applicant to provide a security or equivalent assurance 
sufficient to protect the defendant and to prevent abuse. 
 
4. 
Where provisional measures have been adopted inaudita altera parte, the parties affected 
shall be given notice, without delay after the execution of the measures at the latest.  A review, 
including a right to be heard, shall take place upon request of the defendant with a view to deciding, 
within a reasonable period after the notification of the measures, whether these measures shall be 
modified, revoked or confirmed. 
 
5. 
The applicant may be required to supply other information necessary for the identification of 
the goods concerned by the authority that will execute the provisional measures.  
 
6. 
Without prejudice to paragraph 4, provisional measures taken on the basis of paragraphs 1 
and 2 shall, upon request by the defendant, be revoked or otherwise cease to have effect, if 
proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case are not initiated within a reasonable period, 
to be determined by the judicial authority ordering the measures where a Member's law so permits or, 
in the absence of such a determination, not to exceed 20 working days or 31 calendar days, whichever 
is the longer. 
 
7. 
Where the provisional measures are revoked or where they lapse due to any act or omission 
by the applicant, or where it is subsequently found that there has been no infringement or threat of 
infringement of an intellectual property right, the judicial authorities shall have the authority to order 
the applicant, upon request of the defendant, to provide the defendant appropriate compensation for 
any injury caused by these measures. 
 
8. 
To the extent that any provisional measure can be ordered as a result of administrative 
procedures, such procedures shall conform to principles equivalent in substance to those set forth in 
this Section.  
 
 
 
25
SECTION 4:  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO BORDER MEASURES12 
 
 
Article 51 
 
Suspension of Release by Customs Authorities 
 
 
Members shall, in conformity with the provisions set out below, adopt procedures13  to enable 
a right holder, who has valid grounds for suspecting that the importation of counterfeit trademark or 
pirated copyright goods14  may take place, to lodge an application in writing with competent 
authorities, administrative or judicial, for the suspension by the customs authorities of the release into 
free circulation of such goods.  Members may enable such an application to be made in respect of 
goods which involve other infringements of intellectual property rights, provided that the 
requirements of this Section are met.  Members may also provide for corresponding procedures 
concerning the suspension by the customs authorities of the release of infringing goods destined for 
exportation from their territories. 
 
 
Article 52 
 
Application  
 
 
Any right holder initiating the procedures under Article 51 shall be required to provide 
adequate evidence to satisfy the competent authorities that, under the laws of the country of 
importation, there is  prima facie an infringement of the right holder’s intellectual property right and 
to supply a sufficiently detailed description of the goods to make them readily recognizable by the 
customs authorities.  The competent authorities shall inform the applicant within a reasonable period 
whether they have accepted the application and, where determined by the competent authorities, the 
period for which the customs authorities will take action. 
 
 
Article 53 
 
Security or Equivalent Assurance  
 
1. 
The competent authorities shall have the authority to require an applicant to provide a security 
or equivalent assurance sufficient to protect the defendant and the competent authorities and to 
prevent abuse.  Such security or equivalent assurance shall not unreasonably deter recourse to these 
procedures. 
 
                                                      
12 Where a Member has dismantled substantially all controls over movement of goods across its border 
with another Member with which it forms part of a customs union, it shall not be required to apply the 
provisions of this Section at that border. 
13 It is understood that there shall be no obligation to apply such procedures to imports of goods put on 
the market in another country by or with the consent of the right holder, or to goods in transit. 
14 For the purposes of this Agreement: 
 
(a) 
"counterfeit trademark goods" shall mean any goods, including packaging, bearing without 
authorization a trademark which is identical to the trademark validly registered in respect of such goods, or 
which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark, and which thereby infringes the 
rights of the owner of the trademark in question under the law of the country of importation; 
 
(b) 
"pirated copyright goods" shall mean any goods which are copies made without the consent of 
the right holder or person duly authorized by the right holder in the country of production and which are made 
directly or indirectly from an article where the making of that copy would have constituted an infringement of a 
copyright or a related right under the law of the country of importation. 
 
 
26
2. 
Where pursuant to an application under this Section the release of goods involving industrial 
designs, patents, layout-designs or undisclosed information into free circulation has been suspended 
by customs authorities on the basis of a decision other than by a judicial or other independent 
authority, and the period provided for in Article 55 has expired without the granting of provisional 
relief by the duly empowered authority, and provided that all other conditions for importation have 
been complied with, the owner, importer, or consignee of such goods shall be entitled to their release 
on the posting of a security in an amount sufficient to protect the right holder for any infringement.  
Payment of such security shall not prejudice any other remedy available to the right holder, it being 
understood that the security shall be released if the right holder fails to pursue the right of action 
within a reasonable period of time. 
 
 
Article 54 
 
Notice of Suspension 
 
 
The importer and the applicant shall be promptly notified of the suspension of the release of 
goods according to Article 51. 
 
 
Article 55 
 
Duration of Suspension 
 
 
If, within a period not exceeding 10 working days after the applicant has been served notice 
of the suspension, the customs authorities have not been informed that proceedings leading to a 
decision on the merits of the case have been initiated by a party other than the defendant, or that the 
duly empowered authority has taken provisional measures prolonging the suspension of the release of 
the goods, the goods shall be released, provided that all other conditions for importation or 
exportation have been complied with;  in appropriate cases, this time-limit may be extended by 
another 10 working days.  If proceedings leading to a decision on the merits of the case have been 
initiated, a review, including a right to be heard, shall take place upon request of the defendant with a 
view to deciding, within a reasonable period, whether these measures shall be modified, revoked or 
confirmed.  Notwithstanding the above, where the suspension of the release of goods is carried out or 
continued in accordance with a provisional judicial measure, the provisions of paragraph 6 of 
Article 50 shall apply. 
 
 
Article 56 
 
Indemnification of the Importer  
and of the Owner of the Goods 
 
 
Relevant authorities shall have the authority to order the applicant to pay the importer, the 
consignee and the owner of the goods appropriate compensation for any injury caused to them 
through the wrongful detention of goods or through the detention of goods released pursuant to 
Article 55. 
 
 
Article 57 
 
Right of Inspection and Information  
 
 
Without prejudice to the protection of confidential information, Members shall provide the 
competent authorities the authority to give the right holder sufficient opportunity to have any goods 
detained by the customs authorities inspected in order to substantiate the right holder’s claims.  The 
competent authorities shall also have authority to give the importer an equivalent opportunity to have 
 
 
27
any such goods inspected.  Where a positive determination has been made on the merits of a case, 
Members may provide the competent authorities the authority to inform the right holder of the names 
and addresses of the consignor, the importer and the consignee and of the quantity of the goods in 
question. 
 
 
Article 58 
 
Ex Officio Action 
 
 
Where Members require competent authorities to act upon their own initiative and to suspend 
the release of goods in respect of which they have acquired prima facie evidence that an intellectual 
property right is being infringed: 
 
(a) 
the competent authorities may at any time seek from the right holder any information 
that may assist them to exercise these powers; 
 
(b) 
the importer and the right holder shall be promptly notified of the suspension.  Where 
the importer has lodged an appeal against the suspension with the competent 
authorities, the suspension shall be subject to the conditions, mutatis mutandis, set out 
at Article 55; 
 
(c) 
Members shall only exempt both public authorities and officials from liability to 
appropriate remedial measures where actions are taken or intended in good faith. 
 
 
Article 59 
 
Remedies 
 
 
Without prejudice to other rights of action open to the right holder and subject to the right of 
the defendant to seek review by a judicial authority, competent authorities shall have the authority to 
order the destruction or disposal of infringing goods in accordance with the principles set out in 
Article 46. In regard to counterfeit trademark goods, the authorities shall not allow the re-exportation 
of the infringing goods in an unaltered state or subject them to a different customs procedure, other 
than in exceptional circumstances. 
 
 
Article 60 
 
De Minimis Imports 
 
 
Members may exclude from the application of the above provisions small quantities of goods 
of a non-commercial nature contained in travellers' personal luggage or sent in small consignments. 
 
 
SECTION 5:  CRIMINAL PROCEDURES 
 
 
Article 61 
 
 
Members shall provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied at least in cases of 
wilful trademark counterfeiting or copyright piracy on a commercial scale.  Remedies available shall 
include imprisonment and/or monetary fines sufficient to provide a deterrent, consistently with the 
level of penalties applied for crimes of a corresponding gravity.  In appropriate cases, remedies 
available shall also include the seizure, forfeiture and destruction of the infringing goods and of any 
materials and implements the predominant use of which has been in the commission of the offence.  
 
 
28
Members may provide for criminal procedures and penalties to be applied in other cases of 
infringement of intellectual property rights, in particular where they are committed wilfully and on a 
commercial scale. 
 
 
PART IV 
 
ACQUISITION AND MAINTENANCE OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
RIGHTS AND RELATED INTER-PARTES PROCEDURES 
 
 
Article 62 
 
1. 
Members may require, as a condition of the acquisition or maintenance of the intellectual 
property rights provided for under Sections 2 through 6 of Part II, compliance with reasonable 
procedures and formalities.  Such procedures and formalities shall be consistent with the provisions of 
this Agreement. 
 
2. 
Where the acquisition of an intellectual property right is subject to the right being granted or 
registered, Members shall ensure that the procedures for grant or registration, subject to compliance 
with the substantive conditions for acquisition of the right, permit the granting or registration of the 
right within a reasonable period of time so as to avoid unwarranted curtailment of the period of 
protection. 
 
3. 
Article 4 of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply mutatis mutandis to service marks.  
 
4. 
Procedures concerning the acquisition or maintenance of intellectual property rights and, 
where a Member's law provides for such procedures, administrative revocation and inter partes 
procedures such as opposition, revocation and cancellation, shall be governed by the general 
principles set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 41. 
 
5. 
Final administrative decisions in any of the procedures referred to under paragraph 4 shall be 
subject to review by a judicial or quasi-judicial authority.  However, there shall be no obligation to 
provide an opportunity for such review of decisions in cases of unsuccessful opposition or 
administrative revocation, provided that the grounds for such procedures can be the subject of 
invalidation procedures. 
 
 
PART V 
 
DISPUTE PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT 
 
 
Article 63 
 
Transparency 
 
1. 
Laws and regulations, and final judicial decisions and administrative rulings of general 
application, made effective by a Member pertaining to the subject matter of this Agreement (the 
availability, scope, acquisition, enforcement and prevention of the abuse of intellectual property 
rights) shall be published, or where such publication is not practicable made publicly available, in a 
national language, in such a manner as to enable governments and right holders to become acquainted 
with them.  Agreements concerning the subject matter of this Agreement which are in force between 
the government or a governmental agency of a Member and the government or a governmental 
agency of another Member shall also be published. 
 
 
 
29
2. 
Members shall notify the laws and regulations referred to in paragraph 1 to the Council for 
TRIPS in order to assist that Council in its review of the operation of this Agreement.  The Council 
shall attempt to minimize the burden on Members in carrying out this obligation and may decide to 
waive the obligation to notify such laws and regulations directly to the Council if consultations with 
WIPO on the establishment of a common register containing these laws and regulations are 
successful.  The Council shall also consider in this connection any action required regarding 
notifications pursuant to the obligations under this Agreement stemming from the provisions of 
Article 6ter of the Paris Convention (1967). 
 
3. 
Each Member shall be prepared to supply, in response to a written request from another 
Member, information of the sort referred to in paragraph 1.  A Member, having reason to believe that 
a specific judicial decision or administrative ruling or bilateral agreement in the area of intellectual 
property rights affects its rights under this Agreement, may also request in writing to be given access 
to or be informed in sufficient detail of such specific judicial decisions or administrative rulings or 
bilateral agreements. 
 
4. 
Nothing in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 shall require Members to disclose confidential information 
which would impede law enforcement or otherwise be contrary to the public interest or would 
prejudice the legitimate commercial interests of particular enterprises, public or private. 
 
 
Article 64 
 
Dispute Settlement  
 
1. 
The provisions of Articles XXII and XXIII of GATT 1994 as elaborated and applied by the 
Dispute Settlement Understanding shall apply to consultations and the settlement of disputes under 
this Agreement except as otherwise specifically provided herein. 
 
2. 
Subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994 shall not apply to the settlement 
of disputes under this Agreement for a period of five years from the date of entry into force of the 
WTO Agreement. 
 
3. 
During the time period referred to in paragraph 2, the Council for TRIPS shall examine the 
scope and modalities for complaints of the type provided for under subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) of 
Article XXIII of GATT 1994 made pursuant to this Agreement, and submit its recommendations to 
the Ministerial Conference for approval.  Any decision of the Ministerial Conference to approve such 
recommendations or to extend the period in paragraph 2 shall be made only by consensus, and 
approved recommendations shall be effective for all Members without further formal acceptance 
process.   
 
 
PART VI 
 
TRANSITIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
 
 
Article 65 
 
Transitional Arrangements 
 
1. 
Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2, 3 and 4, no Member shall be obliged to apply the 
provisions of this Agreement before the expiry of a general period of one year following the date of 
entry into force of the WTO Agreement. 
 
 
 
30
2. 
A developing country Member is entitled to delay for a further period of four years the date of 
application, as defined in paragraph 1, of the provisions of this Agreement other than Articles 3, 4 and 
5. 
 
3. 
Any other Member which is in the process of transformation from a centrally-planned into a 
market, free-enterprise economy and which is undertaking structural reform of its intellectual property 
system and facing special problems in the preparation and implementation of intellectual property 
laws and regulations, may also benefit from a period of delay as foreseen in paragraph 2.  
 
4. 
To the extent that a developing country Member is obliged by this Agreement to extend 
product patent protection to areas of technology not so protectable in its territory on the general date 
of application of this Agreement for that Member, as defined in paragraph 2, it may delay the 
application of the provisions on product patents of Section 5 of Part II to such areas of technology for 
an additional period of five years. 
 
5. 
A Member availing itself of a transitional period under paragraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4 shall ensure 
that any changes in its laws, regulations and practice made during that period do not result in a lesser 
degree of consistency with the provisions of this Agreement. 
 
 
Article 66 
 
Least-Developed Country Members 
 
1. 
In view of the special needs and requirements of least-developed country Members, their 
economic, financial and administrative constraints, and their need for flexibility to create a viable 
technological base, such Members shall not be required to apply the provisions of this Agreement, 
other than Articles 3, 4 and 5, for a period of 10 years from the date of application as defined under 
paragraph 1 of Article 65.  The Council for TRIPS shall, upon duly motivated request by a least-
developed country Member, accord extensions of this period. 
 
2. 
Developed country Members shall provide incentives to enterprises and institutions in their 
territories for the purpose of promoting and encouraging technology transfer to least-developed 
country  Members in order to enable them to create a sound and viable technological base. 
 
 
Article 67 
 
Technical Cooperation 
 
 
In order to facilitate the implementation of this Agreement, developed country Members shall 
provide, on request and on mutually agreed terms and conditions, technical and financial cooperation 
in favour of developing and least-developed country Members.  Such cooperation shall include 
assistance in the preparation of laws and regulations on the protection and enforcement of intellectual 
property rights as well as on the prevention of their abuse, and shall include support regarding the 
establishment or reinforcement of domestic offices and agencies relevant to these matters, including 
the training of personnel.   
 
 
 
31
 
PART VII 
 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS;  FINAL PROVISIONS 
 
 
Article 68 
 
Council for Trade-Related Aspects of  
Intellectual Property Rights 
 
 
The Council for TRIPS shall monitor the operation of this Agreement and, in particular, 
Members' compliance with their obligations hereunder, and shall afford Members the opportunity of 
consulting on matters relating to the trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights.  It shall carry 
out such other responsibilities as assigned to it by the Members, and it shall, in particular, provide any 
assistance requested by them in the context of dispute settlement procedures.  In carrying out its 
functions, the Council for TRIPS may consult with and seek information from any source it deems 
appropriate.  In consultation with WIPO, the Council shall seek to establish, within one year of its 
first meeting, appropriate arrangements for cooperation with bodies of that Organization. 
 
 
Article 69 
 
International Cooperation  
 
 
Members agree to cooperate with each other with a view to eliminating international trade in 
goods infringing intellectual property rights.  For this purpose, they shall establish and notify contact 
points in their administrations and be ready to exchange information on trade in infringing goods.  
They shall, in particular, promote the exchange of information and cooperation between customs 
authorities with regard to trade in counterfeit trademark goods and pirated copyright goods.  
 
 
Article 70 
 
Protection of Existing Subject Matter 
 
1. 
This Agreement does not give rise to obligations in respect of acts which occurred before the 
date of application of the Agreement for the Member in question.   
 
2. 
Except as otherwise provided for in this Agreement, this Agreement gives rise to obligations 
in respect of all subject matter existing at the date of application of this Agreement for the Member in 
question, and which is protected in that Member on the said date, or which meets or comes 
subsequently to meet the criteria for protection under the terms of this Agreement.  In respect of this 
paragraph and paragraphs 3 and 4, copyright obligations with respect to existing works shall be solely 
determined under Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971), and obligations with respect to the 
rights of producers of phonograms and performers in existing phonograms shall be determined solely 
under Article 18 of the Berne Convention (1971) as made applicable under paragraph 6 of Article 14 
of this Agreement. 
 
3. 
There shall be no obligation to restore protection to subject matter which on the date of 
application of this Agreement for the Member in question has fallen into the public domain. 
 
4. 
In respect of any acts in respect of specific objects embodying protected subject matter which 
become infringing under the terms of legislation in conformity with this Agreement, and which were 
commenced, or in respect of which a significant investment was made, before the date of acceptance 
of the WTO Agreement by that Member, any Member may provide for a limitation of the remedies 
available to the right holder as to the continued performance of such acts after the date of application 
 
 
32
of this Agreement for that Member.  In such cases the Member shall, however, at least provide for the 
payment of equitable remuneration.    
 
5. 
A Member is not obliged to apply the provisions of Article 11 and of paragraph 4 of 
Article 14 with respect to originals or copies purchased prior to the date of application of this 
Agreement for that Member. 
 
6. 
Members shall not be required to apply Article 31, or the requirement in paragraph 1 of 
Article 27 that patent rights shall be enjoyable without discrimination as to the field of technology, to 
use without the authorization of the right holder where authorization for such use was granted by the 
government before the date this Agreement became known. 
 
7. 
In the case of intellectual property rights for which protection is conditional upon registration, 
applications for protection which are pending on the date of application of this Agreement for the 
Member in question shall be permitted to be amended to claim any enhanced protection provided 
under the provisions of this Agreement.  Such amendments shall not include new matter. 
 
8. 
Where a Member does not make available as of the date of entry into force of the WTO 
Agreement patent protection for pharmaceutical and agricultural chemical products commensurate 
with its obligations under Article 27, that Member shall: 
 
(a) 
notwithstanding the provisions of Part VI, provide as from the date of entry into force 
of the WTO Agreement a means by which applications for patents for such inventions 
can be filed; 
 
(b) 
apply to these applications, as of the date of application of this Agreement, the 
criteria for patentability as laid down in this Agreement as if those criteria were being 
applied on the date of filing in that Member or, where priority is available and 
claimed, the priority date of the application;  and 
 
(c) 
provide patent protection in accordance with this Agreement as from the grant of the 
patent and for the remainder of the patent term, counted from the filing date in 
accordance with Article 33 of this Agreement, for those of these applications that 
meet the criteria for protection referred to in subparagraph (b). 
 
9. 
Where a product is the subject of a patent application in a Member in accordance with 
paragraph 8(a), exclusive marketing rights shall be granted, notwithstanding the provisions of Part VI, 
for a period of five years after obtaining marketing approval in that Member or until a product patent 
is granted or rejected in that Member, whichever period is shorter, provided that, subsequent to the 
entry into force of the WTO Agreement, a patent application has been filed and a patent granted for 
that product in another Member and marketing approval obtained in such other Member.   
 
 
Article 71 
 
Review and Amendment  
 
1. 
The Council for TRIPS shall review the implementation of this Agreement after the  
expiration of the transitional period referred to in paragraph 2 of Article 65.  The Council shall, 
having regard to the experience gained in its implementation, review it two years after that date, and 
at identical intervals thereafter.  The Council may also undertake reviews in the light of any relevant 
new developments which might warrant modification or amendment of this Agreement.   
 
2. 
Amendments merely serving the purpose of adjusting to higher levels of protection of 
intellectual property rights achieved, and in force, in other multilateral agreements and accepted under 
those agreements by all Members of the WTO may be referred to the Ministerial Conference for 
 
 
33
action in accordance with paragraph 6 of Article X of the WTO Agreement on the basis of a 
consensus proposal from the Council for TRIPS.  
 
 
Article 72 
 
Reservations 
 
 
Reservations may not be entered in respect of any of the provisions of this Agreement without 
the consent of the other Members.  
 
 
Article 73 
 
Security Exceptions 
 
 
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed: 
 
(a) 
to require a Member to furnish any information the disclosure of which it considers 
contrary to its essential security interests;  or 
 
(b) 
to prevent a Member from taking any action which it considers necessary for the 
protection of its essential security interests; 
 
(i) 
relating to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; 
 
(ii) 
relating to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such 
traffic in other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for 
the purpose of supplying a military establishment; 
 
(iii) 
taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations;  or 
 
(c) 
to prevent a Member from taking any action in pursuance of its obligations under the 
United Nations Charter for the maintenance of international peace and security. 
 
 
 
34
 
 
THE PARIS CONVENTION (1967) 
PARIS CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY 
 
STOCKHOLM ACT, 1967 
 
Articles 1 through 12 and 19 
 
 
Table of Contents* 
 
 
 
Article 1 
 
Establishment of the Union;  Scope of Industrial Property 
Article 2 
 
National Treatment for Nationals of Countries of the Union 
Article 3 
 
Same Treatment for Certain Categories of Persons as for  
 
 
 
Nationals of Countries of the Union 
Article 4 
 
A to I.  Patents, Utility Models, Industrial Designs, Marks,  
 
 
 
Inventors' Certificates:  Right of Priority.  - G.  Patents:   
 
 
 
Division of the Application 
Article 4bis 
 
Patents:  Independence of Patents Obtained for the Same  
 
 
 
Invention in Different Countries 
Article 4ter 
 
Patents:  Mention of the Inventor in the Patent 
Article 4quater  
Patents:  Patentability in Case of Restrictions of Sale by  
 
 
 
Law 
Article 5 
 
A.  Patents:  Importation of Articles;  Failure to Work of  
 
 
 
Insufficient Working;  Compulsory Licenses.  
 
 
 
- B.  Industrial Designs:  Failure to Work;  Importation of  
 
 
 
Articles. - C.  Marks:  Failure to Use;  Different Forms;   
 
 
 
Use by Co-proprietors.  - D.  Patents, Utility Models,  
 
 
 
Marks, Industrial Designs:  Marking 
Article 5bis 
 
All Industrial Property Rights:  Period of Grace for the  
 
 
 
Payment of Fees for the Maintenance of Rights;  Patents:   
 
 
 
Restoration  
Article 5ter 
 
Patents:  Patented Devices Forming Part of Vessels,  
 
 
 
Aircraft or Land Vehicles 
Article 5quater  
Patents:  Importation of Products Manufactured by a  
 
 
 
Process Patented in the Importing Country 
Article 5quinquies 
Industrial Designs 
Article 6 
 
Marks:  Conditions of Registration;  Independence of  
 
 
 
Protection of Same Mark in Different Countries 
Article 6bis 
 
Marks:  Well-Known Marks 
Article 6ter 
 
Marks:  Prohibitions Concerning State Emblems, Official  
 
 
 
Hallmarks, and Emblems of Intergovernmental  
 
 
 
Organizations 
Article 6quater  
Marks:  Assignment of Marks 
Article 6quinquies 
Marks:  Protection of Marks Registered in One Country of  
 
 
 
the Union in the Other Countries of the Union 
 
_______________ 
 
*According to WIPO publication no. 201, the Table of Contents as reproduced therein did not 
appear in the signed text of the Convention but was added for the convenience of the reader.  We are 
thankful to WIPO for providing us with the text of the Convention, including the Table of Contents, 
on diskette for the purpose of facilitating reproduction in this book.   
 
 
 
 
35
 
 
Article 6sexies  
Marks:  Service Marks 
Article 6septies  
Marks:  Registration in the Name of the Agent of  
 
 
 
Representative of the Proprietor Without the Latter's  
 
 
 
Authorization 
Article 7 
 
Marks:  Nature of the Goods to which the Mark is Applied 
Article 7bis 
 
Marks:  Collective Marks 
Article 8 
 
Trade Names 
Article 9 
 
Marks, Trade Names:  Seizure, on Importation, etc., of  
 
 
 
Goods Unlawfully Bearing a Mark or Trade Name 
Article 10 
 
False Indications:  Seizure, on Importation, etc., of Goods  
 
 
 
Bearing False Indications as to their Source or the Identity  
 
 
 
of the Producer 
Article 10bis 
 
Unfair Competition 
Article 10ter 
 
Marks, Trade Names, False Indications, Unfair  
 
 
 
Competition:  Remedies, Right to Sue 
Article 11 
 
Inventions, Utility Models, Industrial Designs, Marks:   
 
 
 
Temporary Protection at Certain International Exhibitions 
Article 12 
 
Special National Industrial Property Services 
Article 19 
 
Special Agreements 
 
 
 
36
PARIS CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF 
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY 
 
STOCKHOLM ACT, 1967 
ARTICLES 1 THROUGH 12 AND 19 
 
 
Article 1 
(1) 
The countries to which this Convention applies constitute a Union for the protection of 
industrial property. 
 
(2) 
The protection of industrial property has as its object patents, utility models, industrial 
designs, trademarks, service marks, trade names, indications of source or appellations of origin, and 
the repression of unfair competition. 
 
(3) 
Industrial property shall be understood in the broadest sense and shall apply not only to 
industry and commerce proper, but likewise to agricultural and extractive industries and to all 
manufactured or natural products, for example, wines, grain, tobacco leaf, fruit, cattle, minerals, 
mineral waters, beer, flowers, and flour. 
 
(4) 
Patents shall include the various kinds of industrial patents recognized by the laws of the 
countries of the Union, such as patents of importation, patents of improvement, patents and 
certificates of addition, etc. 
 
 
Article 2 
 
(1) 
Nationals of any country of the Union shall, as regards the protection of industrial property, 
enjoy in all the other countries of the Union the advantages that their respective laws now grant, or 
may hereafter grant, to nationals; all without prejudice to the rights specially provided for by this 
Convention. Consequently, they shall have the same protection as the latter, and the same legal 
remedy against any infringement of their rights, provided that the conditions and formalities imposed 
upon nationals are complied with.   
 
(2) 
However, no requirement as to domicile or establishment in the country where protection is 
claimed may be imposed upon nationals of countries of the Union for the enjoyment of any industrial 
property rights. 
 
(3) 
The provisions of the laws of each of the countries of the Union relating to judicial and 
administrative procedure and to jurisdiction, and to the designation of an address for service or the 
appointment of an agent, which may be required by the laws on industrial property are expressly 
reserved. 
 
Article 3 
 
 
Nationals of countries outside the Union who are domiciled or who have real and effective 
industrial or commercial establishments in the territory of one of the countries of the Union shall be 
treated in the same manner as nationals of the countries of the Union.   
 
 
Article 4 
 
A. 
(1) 
Any person who has duly filed an application for a patent, or for the registration of a 
utility model, or of an industrial design, or of a trademark, in one of the countries of the 
Union, or his successor in title, shall enjoy, for the purpose of filing in the other countries, a 
right of priority during the periods hereinafter fixed. 
 
 
 
37
(2) 
Any filing that is equivalent to a regular national filing under the domestic legislation 
of any country of the Union or under bilateral or multilateral treaties concluded between 
countries of the Union shall be recognized as giving rise to the right of priority. 
 
(3) 
By a regular national filing is meant any filing that is adequate to establish the date on 
which the application was filed in the country concerned, whatever may be the subsequent 
fate of the application. 
 
B. 
Consequently, any subsequent filing in any of the other countries of the Union before the 
expiration of the periods referred to above shall not be invalidated by reason of any acts 
accomplished in the interval, in particular, another filing, the publication or exploitation of the 
invention, the putting on sale of copies of the design, or the use of the mark, and such acts 
cannot give rise to any third-party right or any right of personal possession. Rights acquired 
by third parties before the date of the first application that serves as the basis for the right of 
priority are reserved in accordance with the domestic legislation of each country of the Union. 
   
C. 
(1) 
The periods of priority referred to above shall be twelve months for patents and utility 
models, and six months for industrial designs and trademarks.   
 
(2) 
These periods shall start from the date of filing of the first application; the day of 
filing shall not be included in the period.   
 
(3) 
If the last day of the period is an official holiday, or a day when the Office is not open 
for the filing of applications in the country where protection is claimed, the period shall be 
extended until the first following working day. 
 
(4) 
A subsequent application concerning the same subject as a previous first application 
within the meaning of paragraph (2), above, filed in the same country of the Union. shall be 
considered as the first application, of which the filing date shall be the starting point of the 
period of priority, if, at the time of filing the subsequent application, the said previous 
application has been withdrawn, abandoned, or refused, without having been laid open to 
public inspection and without leaving any rights outstanding, and if it has not yet served as a 
basis for claiming a right of priority. The previous application may not thereafter serve as a 
basis for claiming a right of priority. 
 
D. 
(1) 
Any person desiring to take advantage of the priority of a previous filing shall be 
required to make a declaration indicating the date of such filing and the country in which it 
was made. Each country shall determine the latest date on which such declaration must be 
made. 
 
(2) 
These particulars shall be mentioned in the publications issued by the competent 
authority, and in particular in the patents and the specifications relating thereto.   
 
(3) 
The countries of the Union may require any person making a declaration of priority to 
produce a copy of the application (description, drawings, etc.) previously filed. The copy, 
certified as correct by the authority which received such application, shall not require any 
authentication, and may in any case be filed, without fee, at any time within three months of 
the filing of the subsequent application. They may require it to be accompanied by a 
certificate from the same authority showing the date of filing, and by a translation.   
 
(4) 
No other formalities may be required for the declaration of priority at the time of 
filing the application. Each country of the Union shall determine the consequences of failure 
to comply with the formalities prescribed by this Article, but such consequences shall in no 
case go beyond the loss of the right of priority. 
 
 
 
38
(5) 
Subsequently, further proof may be required. Any person who avails himself of the 
priority of a previous application shall be required to specify the number of that application;  
this number shall be published as provided for by paragraph (2), above.   
 
E. 
(1) 
Where an industrial design is filed in a country by virtue of a right of priority based 
on the filing of a utility model, the period of priority shall be the same as that fixed for 
industrial designs.   
 
(2) 
Furthermore, it is permissible to file a utility model in a country by virtue of a right of 
priority based on the filing of a patent application, and vice versa.   
 
F. 
No country of the Union may refuse a priority or a patent application on the ground that the 
applicant claims multiple priorities, even if they originate in different countries, or on the 
ground that an application claiming one or more priorities contains one or more elements that 
were not included in the application or applications whose priority is claimed, provided that, 
in both cases, there is unity of invention within the meaning of the law of the country.   
 
With respect to the elements not included in the application or applications whose priority is 
claimed, the filing of the subsequent application shall give rise to a right of priority under 
ordinary conditions. 
 
G. 
(1) 
If the examination reveals that an application for a patent contains more than one 
invention, the applicant may divide the application into a certain number of divisional 
applications and preserve as the date of each the date of the initial application and the benefit 
of the right of priority, if any.   
 
(2) 
The applicant may also, on his own initiative, divide a patent application and preserve 
as the date of each divisional application the date of the initial application and the benefit of 
the right of priority, if any. Each country of the Union shall have the right to determine the 
conditions under which such division shall be authorized. 
 
H. 
Priority may not be refused on the ground that certain elements of the invention for which 
priority is claimed do not appear among the claims formulated in the application in the 
country of origin, provided that the application documents as a whole specifically disclose 
such elements.   
 
I. 
(1) 
Applications for inventors' certificates filed in a country in which applicants have the 
right to apply at their own option either for a patent or for an inventor's certificate shall give 
rise to the right of priority provided for by this Article, under the same conditions and with 
the same effects as applications for patents. 
 
(2) 
In a country in which applicants have the right to apply at their own option either for 
a patent or for an inventor's certificate, an applicant for an inventor's certificate shall, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Article relating to patent applications, enjoy a right of 
priority based on an application for a patent, a utility model, or an inventor's certificate. 
 
 
Article 4bis 
 
(1) 
Patents applied for in the various countries of the Union by nationals of countries of the 
Union shall be independent of patents obtained for the same invention in other countries, whether 
members of the Union or not. 
 
(2) 
The foregoing provision is to be understood in an unrestricted sense, in particular, in the sense 
that patents applied for during the period of priority are independent, both as regards the grounds for 
nullity and forfeiture, and as regards their normal duration.   
 
 
 
39
(3) 
The provision shall apply to all patents existing at the time when it comes into effect.   
 
(4) 
Similarly, it shall apply, in the case of the accession of new countries, to patents in existence 
on either side at the time of accession. 
 
(5) 
Patents obtained with the benefit of priority shall, in the various countries of the Union, have 
a duration equal to that which they would have, had they been applied for or granted without the 
benefit of priority. 
 
 
Article 4ter 
 
 
The inventor shall have the right to be mentioned as such in the patent. 
 
 
Article 4quater 
 
 
The grant of a patent shall not be refused and a patent shall not be invalidated on the ground 
that the sale of the patented product or of a product obtained by means of a patented process is subject 
to restrictions or limitations resulting from the domestic law.   
 
 
Article 5 
 
A. 
(1) 
Importation by the patentee into the country where the patent has been granted of 
articles manufactured in any of the countries of the Union shall not entail forfeiture of the 
patent. 
 
(2) 
Each country of the Union shall have the right to take legislative measures providing 
for the grant of compulsory licenses to prevent the abuses which might result from the 
exercise of the exclusive rights conferred by the patent, for example, failure to work. 
 
(3) 
Forfeiture of the patent shall not be provided for except in cases where the grant of 
compulsory licenses would not have been sufficient to prevent the said abuses. No 
proceedings for the forfeiture or revocation of a patent may be instituted before the expiration 
of two years from the grant of the first compulsory license. 
 
(4) 
A compulsory license may not be applied for on the ground of failure to work or 
insufficient working before the expiration of a period of four years from the date of filing of 
the patent application or three years from the date of the grant of the patent, whichever period 
expires last; it shall be refused if the patentee justifies his inaction by legitimate reasons. Such 
a compulsory license shall be non-exclusive and shall not be transferable, even in the form of 
the grant of a sub-license, except with that part of the enterprise or goodwill which exploits 
such license. 
 
(5) 
The foregoing provisions shall be applicable, mutatis mutandis, to utility models. 
 
B. 
The protection of industrial designs shall not, under any circumstance, be subject to any 
forfeiture, either by reason of failure to work or by reason of the importation of articles 
corresponding to those which are protected.   
 
C. 
(1) 
If, in any country, use of the registered mark is compulsory, the registration may be 
cancelled only after a reasonable period, and then only if the person concerned does not 
justify his inaction. 
 
(2) 
Use of a trademark by the proprietor in a form differing in elements which do not 
alter the distinctive character of the mark in the form in which it was registered in one of the 
 
 
40
countries of the Union shall not entail invalidation of the registration and shall not diminish 
the protection granted to the mark. 
 
(3) 
Concurrent use of the same mark on identical or similar goods by industrial or 
commercial establishments considered as co-proprietors of the mark according to the 
provisions of the domestic law of the country where protection is claimed shall not prevent 
registration or diminish in any way the protection granted to the said mark in any country of 
the Union, provided that such use does not result in misleading the public and is not contrary 
to the public interest.   
 
D. 
No indication or mention of the patent, of the utility model, of the registration of the 
trademark, or of the deposit of the industrial design, shall be required upon the goods as a 
condition of recognition of the right to protection.   
 
 
Article 5bis 
 
(1) 
A period of grace of not less than six months shall be allowed for the payment of the fees 
prescribed for the maintenance of industrial property rights, subject, if the domestic legislation so 
provides, to the payment of a surcharge.   
 
(2) 
The countries of the Union shall have the right to provide for the restoration of patents which 
have lapsed by reason of non-payment of fees. 
 
 
Article 5ter 
 
 
In any country of the Union the following shall not be considered as infringements of the 
rights of a patentee:   
 
1. 
the use on board vessels of other countries of the Union of devices forming the 
subject of his patent in the body of the vessel, in the machinery, tackle, gear and other 
accessories, when such vessels temporarily or accidentally enter the waters of the said 
country, provided that such devices are used there exclusively for the needs of the 
vessel; 
 
2. 
the use of devices forming the subject of the patent in the construction or operation of 
aircraft or land vehicles of other countries of the Union, or of accessories of such 
aircraft or land vehicles, when those aircraft or land vehicles temporarily or 
accidentally enter the said country. 
 
 
Article 5quater 
 
 
When a product is imported into a country of the Union where there exists a patent protecting 
a process of manufacture of the said product, the patentee shall have all the rights, with regard to the 
imported product, that are accorded to him by the legislation of the country of importation, on the 
basis of the process patent, with respect to products manufactured in that country.   
 
 
Article 5quinquies 
 
 
Industrial designs shall be protected in all the countries of the Union. 
 
 
 
41
Article 6 
 
(1) 
The conditions for the filing and registration of trademarks shall be determined in each 
country of the Union by its domestic legislation.   
 
(2) 
However, an application for the registration of a mark filed by a national of a country of the 
Union in any country of the Union may not be refused, nor may a registration be invalidated, on the 
ground that filing, registration, or renewal, has not been effected in the country of origin.   
 
(3) 
A mark duly registered in a country of the Union shall be regarded as independent of marks 
registered in the other countries of the Union, including the country of origin. 
 
 
Article 6bis 
 
(1) 
The countries of the Union undertake, ex officio if their legislation so permits, or at the 
request of an interested party, to refuse or to cancel the registration, and to prohibit the use, of a 
trademark which constitutes a reproduction, an imitation, or a translation, liable to create confusion, 
of a mark considered by the competent authority of the country of registration or use to be well known 
in that country as being already the mark of a person entitled to the benefits of this Convention and 
used for identical or similar goods. These provisions shall also apply when the essential part of the 
mark constitutes a reproduction of any such well-known mark or an imitation liable to create 
confusion therewith. 
 
(2) 
A period of at least five years from the date of registration shall be allowed for requesting the 
cancellation of such a mark. The countries of the Union may provide for a period within which the 
prohibition of use must be requested.   
 
(3) 
No time limit shall be fixed for requesting the cancellation or the prohibition of the use of 
marks registered or used in bad faith.   
 
 
Article 6ter 
 
(1) 
(a) 
The countries of the Union agree to refuse or to invalidate the registration, and to 
prohibit by appropriate measures the use, without authorization by the competent authorities, 
either as trademarks or as elements of trademarks, of armorial bearings, flags, and other State 
emblems, of the countries of the Union, official signs and hallmarks indicating control and 
warranty adopted by them, and any imitation from a heraldic point of view. 
 
(b) 
The provisions of subparagraph (a), above, shall apply equally to armorial bearings, 
flags, other emblems, abbreviations, and names, of international intergovernmental 
organizations of which one or more countries of the Union are members, with the exception 
of armorial bearings, flags, other emblems, abbreviations, and names, that are already the 
subject of international agreements in force, intended to ensure their protection. 
 
(c) 
No country of the Union shall be required to apply the provisions of 
subparagraph (b), above, to the prejudice of the owners of rights acquired in good faith before 
the entry into force, in that country, of this Convention. The countries of the Union shall not 
be required to apply the said provisions when the use or registration referred to in 
subparagraph (a), above, is not of such a nature as to suggest to the public that a connection 
exists between the organization concerned and the armorial bearings, flags, emblems, 
abbreviations, and names, or if such use or registration is probably not of such a nature as to 
mislead the public as to the existence of a connection between the user and the organization. 
 
 
 
42
(2) 
Prohibition of the use of official signs and hallmarks indicating control and warranty shall 
apply solely in cases where the marks in which they are incorporated are intended to be used on goods 
of the same or a similar kind.   
 
(3) 
(a) 
For the application of these provisions, the countries of the Union agree to 
communicate reciprocally, through the intermediary of the International Bureau, the list of 
State emblems, and official signs and hallmarks indicating control and warranty, which they 
desire, or may hereafter desire, to place wholly or within certain limits under the protection of 
this Article, and all subsequent modifications of such list. Each country of the Union shall in 
due course make available to the public the lists so communicated.   
 
 
Nevertheless such communication is not obligatory in respect of flags of States. 
 
(b) 
The provisions of paragraph (1)(b) of this Article shall apply only to such armorial 
bearings, flags, other emblems, abbreviations, and names, of international intergovernmental 
organizations as the latter have communicated to the countries of the Union through the 
intermediary of the International Bureau. 
 
(4) 
Any country of the Union may, within a period of twelve months from the receipt of the 
notification, transmit its objections, if any, through the intermediary of the International Bureau, to the 
country or international intergovernmental organization concerned. 
 
(5) 
In the case of State flags, the measures prescribed by paragraph (1), above, shall apply solely 
to marks registered after November 6, 1925. 
 
(6) 
In the case of State emblems other than flags, and of official signs and hallmarks of the 
countries of the Union, and in the case of armorial bearings, flags, other emblems. abbreviations, and 
names, of international intergovernmental organizations, these provisions shall apply only to marks 
registered more than two months after receipt of the communication provided for in paragraph (3), 
above. 
 
(7) 
In cases of bad faith, the countries shall have the right to cancel even those marks 
incorporating State emblems, signs, and hallmarks, which were registered before November 6, 1925.   
 
(8) 
Nationals of any country who are authorized to make use of the State emblems, signs, and 
hallmarks, of their country may use them even if they are similar to those of another country. 
 
(9) 
The countries of the Union undertake to prohibit the unauthorized use in trade of the State 
armorial bearings of the other countries of the Union, when the use is of such a nature as to be 
misleading as to the origin of the goods. 
 
(10) 
The above provisions shall not prevent the countries from exercising the right given in 
Article 6quinquies(B)(3), to refuse or to invalidate the registration of marks incorporating, without 
authorization, armorial bearings, flags, other State emblems, or official signs and hallmarks adopted 
by a country of the Union, as well as the distinctive signs of international intergovernmental 
organizations referred to in paragraph (1), above. 
 
 
Article 6quater 
 
(1) 
When, in accordance with the law of a country of the Union, the assignment of a mark is valid 
only if it takes place at the same time as the transfer of the business or goodwill to which the mark 
belongs, it shall suffice for the recognition of such validity that the portion of the business or goodwill 
located in that country be transferred to the assignee, together with the exclusive right to manufacture 
in the said country, or to sell therein, the goods bearing the mark assigned. 
 
 
 
43
(2) 
The foregoing provision does not impose upon the countries of the Union any obligation to 
regard as valid the assignment of any mark the use of which by the assignee would, in fact, be of such 
a nature as to mislead the public, particularly as regards the origin, nature, or essential qualities, of the 
goods to which the mark is applied. 
 
 
Article 6quinquies 
 
A. 
(1) 
Every trademark duly registered in the country of origin shall be accepted for filing 
and protected as is in the other countries of the Union, subject to the reservations indicated in 
this Article. Such countries may, before proceeding to final registration, require the 
production of a certificate of registration in the country of origin, issued by the competent 
authority. No authentication shall be required for this certificate. 
 
(2) 
Shall be considered the country of origin the country of the Union where the 
applicant has a real and effective industrial or commercial establishment, or, if he has no such 
establishment within the Union, the country of the Union where he has his domicile, or, if he 
has no domicile within the Union but is a national of a country of the Union, the country of 
which he is a national.   
 
B. 
Trademarks covered by this Article may be neither denied registration nor invalidated except 
in the following cases:   
 
1. 
when they are of such a nature as to infringe rights acquired by third parties in the 
country where protection is claimed;   
 
2. 
when they are devoid of any distinctive character, or consist exclusively of signs or 
indications which may serve, in trade, to designate the kind, quality, quantity, 
intended purpose, value, place of origin, of the goods, or the time of production, or 
have become customary in the current language or in the bona fide and established 
practices of the trade of the country where protection is claimed;   
 
3. 
when they are contrary to morality or public order and, in particular, of such a nature 
as to deceive the public. It is understood that a mark may not be considered contrary 
to public order for the sole reason that it does not conform to a provision of the 
legislation on marks, except if such provision itself relates to public order. 
 
 
This provision is subject, however, to the application of Article 10bis. 
 
C. 
(1) 
In determining whether a mark is eligible for protection, all the factual circumstances 
must be taken into consideration, particularly the length of time the mark has been in use. 
 
(2) 
No trademark shall be refused in the other countries of the Union for the sole reason 
that it differs from the mark protected in the country of origin only in respect of elements that 
do not alter its distinctive character and do not affect its identity in the form in which it has 
been registered in the said country of origin. 
 
D. 
No person may benefit from the provisions of this Article if the mark for which he claims 
protection is not registered in the country of origin.   
 
E. 
However, in no case shall the renewal of the registration of the mark in the country of origin 
involve an obligation to renew the registration in the other countries of the Union in which the 
mark has been registered. 
 
F. 
The benefit of priority shall remain unaffected for applications for the registration of marks 
filed within the period fixed by Article 4, even if registration in the country of origin is 
effected after the expiration of such period.   
 
 
44
 
Article 6sexies 
 
 
The countries of the Union undertake to protect service marks. They shall not be required to 
provide for the registration of such marks.   
 
 
Article 6septies 
 
(1) 
If the agent or representative of the person who is the proprietor of a mark in one of the 
countries of the Union applies, without such proprietor's authorization, for the registration of the mark 
in his own name, in one or more countries of the Union, the proprietor shall be entitled to oppose the 
registration applied for or demand its cancellation or, if the law of the country so allows, the 
assignment in his favor of the said registration, unless such agent or representative justifies his action.   
 
(2) 
The proprietor of the mark shall, subject to the provisions of paragraph (1), above, be entitled 
to oppose the use of his mark by his agent or representative if he has not authorized such use. 
 
(3) 
Domestic legislation may provide an equitable time limit within which the proprietor of a 
mark must exercise the rights provided for in this Article. 
 
 
Article 7 
 
 
The nature of the goods to which a trademark is to be applied shall in no case form an 
obstacle to the registration of the mark.   
 
 
Article 7bis 
 
(1) 
The countries of the Union undertake to accept for filing and to protect collective marks 
belonging to associations the existence of which is not contrary to the law of the country of origin, 
even if such associations do not possess an industrial or commercial establishment.   
 
(2) 
Each country shall be the judge of the particular conditions under which a collective mark 
shall be protected and may refuse protection if the mark is contrary to the public interest.   
 
(3) 
Nevertheless, the protection of these marks shall not be refused to any association the 
existence of which is not contrary to the law of the country of origin, on the ground that such 
association is not established in the country where protection is sought or is not constituted according 
to the law of the latter country. 
 
Article 8 
 
 
A trade name shall be protected in all the countries of the Union without the obligation of 
filing or registration, whether or not it forms part of a trademark.   
 
 
Article 9 
 
(1) 
All goods unlawfully bearing a trademark or trade name shall be seized on importation into 
those countries of the Union where such mark or trade name is entitled to legal protection.   
 
(2) 
Seizure shall likewise be effected in the country where the unlawful affixation occurred or in 
the country into which the goods were imported. 
 
 
 
45
(3) 
Seizure shall take place at the request of the public prosecutor, or any other competent 
authority, or any interested party, whether a natural person or a legal entity, in conformity with the 
domestic legislation of each country.   
 
(4) 
The authorities shall not be bound to effect seizure of goods in transit.   
 
(5) 
If the legislation of a country does not permit seizure on importation, seizure shall be replaced 
by prohibition of importation or by seizure inside the country.   
 
(6) 
If the legislation of a country permits neither seizure on importation nor prohibition of 
importation nor seizure inside the country, then, until such time as the legislation is modified 
accordingly, these measures shall be replaced by the actions and remedies available in such cases to 
nationals under the law of such country. 
 
 
Article 10 
 
(1) 
The provisions of the preceding Article shall apply in cases of direct or indirect use of a false 
indication of the source of the good or the identity of the producer, manufacturer, or merchant. 
 
(2) 
Any producer, manufacturer, or merchant, whether a natural person or a legal entity, engaged 
in the production or manufacture of or trade in such goods and established either in the locality falsely 
indicated as the source, or in the region where such locality is situated, or in the country falsely 
indicated, or in the country where the false indication of source is used, shall in any case he deemed 
an interested party. 
 
 
Article 10bis 
 
(1) 
The countries of the Union are bound to assure to nationals of such countries effective 
protection against unfair competition.   
 
(2) 
Any act of competition contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial matters 
constitutes an act of unfair competition. 
 
(3) 
The following in particular shall be prohibited:   
 
1. 
all acts of such a nature as to create confusion by any means whatever with the 
establishment, the goods, or the industrial or commercial activities, of a competitor;   
2. 
false allegations in the course of trade of such a nature as to discredit the 
establishment, the goods, or the industrial or commercial activities, of a competitor;   
 
3. 
indications or allegations the use of which in the course of trade is liable to mislead 
the public as to the nature, the manufacturing process, the characteristics, the 
suitability for their purpose, or the quantity, of the goods. 
 
 
Article 10ter 
 
(1) 
The countries of the Union undertake to assure to nationals of the other countries of the Union 
appropriate legal remedies effectively to repress all the acts referred to in Articles 9, 10, and 10bis.   
(2) 
They undertake, further, to provide measures to permit federations and associations 
representing interested industrialists, producers, or merchants, provided that the existence of such 
federations and associations is not contrary to the laws of their countries, to take action in the courts 
or before the administrative authorities, with a view to the repression of the acts referred to in Articles 
9, 10, and 10bis, in so far as the law of the country in which protection is claimed allows such action 
by federations and associations of that country.   
 
 
46
 
Article 11 
 
(1) 
The countries of the Union shall, in conformity with their domestic legislation, grant 
temporary protection to patentable inventions, utility models, industrial designs, and trademarks, in 
respect of goods exhibited at official or officially recognized international exhibitions held in the 
territory of any of them. 
 
(2) 
Such temporary protection shall not extend the periods provided by Article 4. If, later, the 
right of priority is invoked, the authorities of any country may provide that the period shall start from 
the date of introduction of the goods into the exhibition.   
 
(3) 
Each country may require, as proof of the identity of the article exhibited and of the date of its 
introduction, such documentary evidence as it considers necessary. 
 
 
Article 12 
 
(1) 
Each country of the Union undertakes to establish a special industrial property service and a 
central office for the communication to the public of patents, utility models, industrial designs, and 
trademarks. 
 
(2) 
This service shall publish an official periodical journal. It shall publish regularly: 
 
(a) 
the names of the proprietors of patents granted, with a brief designation of the 
inventions patented; 
 
(b) 
the reproductions of registered trademarks. 
 
Article 19 
 
 
It is understood that the countries of the Union reserve the right to make separately between 
themselves special agreements for the protection of industrial property, in so far as these agreements 
do not contravene the provisions of this Convention.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47
THE BERNE CONVENTION (1971) 
 
 
BERNE CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF 
LITERARY AND ARTISTIC WORKS 
 
PARIS ACT, 1971 
 
Articles 1 through 21 and Appendix 
 
Table of Contents* 
 
 
Article 1 
 
Establishment of a Union 
Article 2 
 
Protected Works:  1.  "Literary and artistic works";   
 
 
 
2.  Possible requirement of fixation;  3.  Derivative works;   
 
 
 
4.  Official texts;  5.  Collections;  6.  Obligation to  
 
 
 
protect;  beneficiaries of protection;  7.  Works of  
 
 
 
applied art and industrial designs;  8.  News 
Article 2bis 
 
Possible Limitation of Protection of Certain Works:   
 
 
 
1.  Certain speeches;  2.  Certain uses of lectures and  
 
 
 
addresses;  3.  Right to make collections of such works 
Article 3 
 
Criteria of Eligibility for Protection:  1.  Nationality of  
 
 
 
author;  place of publication of work;  2.  Residence of  
 
 
 
author;  3.  "Published" works;  4.  "Simultaneously  
 
 
 
published" works 
Article 4 
 
Criteria of Eligibility for Protection of Cinematographic  
 
 
 
Works, Works of Architecture and Certain Artistic Works 
Article 5 
 
Rights Guaranteed:  1. and 2.  Outside the Country of  
 
 
 
origin;  3.  in the country of origin;  4.  "Country of origin" 
Article 6 
 
Possible Restriction of Protection in Respect of Certain  
 
 
 
Works of Nationals of Certain Countries Outside the Union:   
 
 
 
1.  In the country of the first publication and in other  
 
 
 
countries;  2.  No retroactivity;  3.  Notice 
Article 6bis 
 
Moral Rights:  1.  To claim authorship;  to object to  
 
 
 
certain modifications and other derogatory actions;   
 
 
 
2.  After the author's death;  3.  Means of redress 
Article 7 
 
Term of Protection:  1.  Generally;  2.  For  
 
 
 
cinematographic works;  3.  For anonymous and  
 
 
 
pseudonymous works;  4.  For photographic works and  
 
 
 
works of applied art;  5.  Starting date of computation;   
 
 
 
6.  Longer terms;  7.  Shorter terms;  8.  Applicable law;   
 
 
 
"comparison" of terms 
Article 7bis 
 
Term of Protection for Works of Joint Authorship 
Article 8 
 
Right of Translation 
Article 9 
 
Right of Reproduction:  1.  Generally;  2.  Possible  
 
 
 
exceptions;  3.  Sound and visual recordings 
 
 
_______________ 
 
*According to WIPO publication no. 287, the Table of Contents as reproduced therein did not 
appear in the signed text of the Convention but was added for the convenience of the reader.  We are 
thankful to WIPO for providing us with the text of the Convention, including the Table of Contents, 
on diskette for the purpose of facilitating reproduction in this book.    
 
 
 
 
 
48
Article 10 
 
Certain Free Uses of Works:  1.  Quotations;   
 
 
 
2.  Illustrations for teaching;  3.  Indication of source and  
 
 
 
author 
Article 10bis 
 
Further Possible Free Uses of Works:  1.  Of certain  
 
 
 
articles and broadcast works;  2.  Of works seen or heard in  
 
 
 
connection with current events 
Article 11 
 
Certain Rights in Dramatic and Musical Works:  1.  Right  
 
 
 
of public performance and of communication to the public  
 
 
 
of a performance;  2.  In respect of translations 
Article 11bis 
 
Broadcasting and Related Rights:  1.  Broadcasting and  
 
 
 
other wireless communications, public communication of  
 
 
 
broadcast by wire or rebroadcast, public communication of  
 
 
 
broadcast by loudspeaker or analogous instruments;   
 
 
 
2.  Compulsory licenses;  3.  Recording;  ephemeral recordings 
Article 11ter 
 
Certain Rights in Literary Works:  1.  Right of public  
 
 
 
recitation and of communication to the public of a  
 
 
 
recitation;  2.  In respect of translations 
Article 12 
 
Right of Adaptation, Arrangement and Other Alteration 
Article 13 
 
Possible Limitation of the Right of Recording of Musical  
 
 
 
Works and Any Words Pertaining Thereto:  1.  Compulsory  
 
 
 
licenses;  2.  Transitory measures;  3.  Seizure on  
 
 
 
importation of copies made without the author's permission 
Article 14 
 
Cinematographic and Related Rights:  1.  Cinematographic  
 
 
 
adaptation and reproduction;  distribution;  public  
 
 
 
performance and public communication by wire of works  
 
 
 
thus adapted or reproduced;  2.  Adaptation of  
 
 
 
cinematographic productions;  3.  No compulsory licenses 
Article 14bis 
 
Special Provisions Concerning Cinematographic Works:   
 
 
 
1.  Assimilation to "original" works;  2.  Ownership;   
 
 
 
limitation of certain rights of certain contributors;   
 
 
 
3.  Certain other contributors 
Article 14ter 
 
"Droit de suite" in Works of Art and Manuscripts;   
 
 
 
1.  Right to an interest in resales;  2.  Applicable law;   
 
 
 
3.  Procedure 
Article 15 
 
Right to Enforce Protected Rights:  1.  Where author's  
 
 
 
name is indicated or where pseudonym leaves no doubt as to  
 
 
 
author's identity;  2.  In the case of cinematographic works;   
 
 
 
3.  In the case of anonymous and pseudonymous works;   
 
 
 
4.  In the case of certain unpublished works of unknown  
 
 
 
authorship 
Article 16 
 
Infringing Copies:  1.  Seizure;  2.  Seizure on importation;   
 
 
 
3.  Applicable law 
Article 17 
 
Possibility of Control of Circulation, Presentation and  
 
 
 
Exhibition of Works 
Article 18 
 
Works Existing on Convention's Entry Into Force:   
 
 
 
1.  Protectable where protection not yet expired in country  
 
 
 
of origin;  2.  Non-protectable where protection already  
 
 
 
expired in country where it is claimed;  3.  Application of  
 
 
 
these principles;  4.  Special cases 
Article 19 
 
Protection Greater than Resulting from Convention 
Article 20 
 
Special Agreements Among Countries of the Union 
Article 21 
 
Special Provisions Regarding Developing Countries:   
 
 
 
1.  Reference to Appendix;  2.  Appendix part of Act 
 
 
 
49
APPENDIX 
 
Special Provisions Regarding Developing Countries 
 
 
Article I 
Faculties Open to Developing Countries:  1.  Availability of  
 
 
 
certain faculties;  declaration;  2.  Duration of effect of  
 
 
 
declaration;  3.  Cessation of developing country status;   
 
 
 
4.  Existing stocks of copies;  5.  Declarations concerning  
 
 
 
certain territories;  6.  Limits of reciprocity 
 
Article II 
Limitations on the Right of Translation:  1.  Licenses  
 
 
 
grantable by competent authority;  2. to 4.  Conditions  
 
 
 
allowing the grant of such licenses;  5.  Purposes for which  
 
 
 
licenses may be granted;  6.  Termination of licenses;   
 
 
 
7.  Works composed mainly of illustrations;  8.  Works  
 
 
 
withdrawn from circulation;  9.  Licenses for broadcasting  
 
 
 
organizations 
 
Article III 
Limitation on the Right of Reproduction:  1.  Licenses  
 
 
 
grantable by competent authority;  2. to 5.  Conditions  
 
 
 
allowing the grant of such licenses;  6.  Termination of  
 
 
 
licenses;  7.  Works to which this Article applies 
 
Article IV 
Provisions Common to Licenses Under Articles II and III:   
 
 
 
1. and 2.  Procedure;  3.  Indication of author and title  
 
 
 
of work;  4.  Exportation of copies;  5.  Notice;   
 
 
 
6.  Compensation 
 
Article V 
Alternative Possibility for Limitation of the Right of  
 
 
 
Translation:  1.  Regime provided for under the 1886 and  
 
 
 
1896 Acts;  2.  No possibility of change to regime under  
 
 
 
Article II;  3.  Time limit for choosing the alternative  
 
 
 
possibility 
 
Article VI 
Possibilities of Applying, or Admitting the Application of,  
 
 
 
Certain Provisions of the Appendix Before Becoming Bound  
 
 
 
by It:  1.  Declaration;  2.  Depository and effective date of  
 
 
 
declaration 
 
 
 
 
50
BERNE CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF 
LITERARY AND ARTISTIC WORKS 
 
PARIS ACT, 1971 
 
ARTICLES 1 THROUGH 21 AND APPENDIX 
 
 
Article 1 
 
 
The countries to which this Convention applies constitute a Union for the protection of the 
rights of authors in their literary and artistic works. 
 
 
Article 2 
 
(1) 
The expression "literary and artistic works" shall include every production in the literary, 
scientific and artistic domain, whatever may be the mode or form of its expression, such as books, 
pamphlets and other writings; lectures, addresses, sermons and other works of the same nature; 
dramatic or dramatico-musical works; choreographic works and entertainments in dumb show; 
musical compositions with or without words; cinematographic works to which are assimilated works 
expressed by a process analogous to cinematography; works of drawing, painting, architecture, 
sculpture, engraving and lithography; photographic works to which are assimilated works expressed 
by a process analogous to photography; works of applied art; illustrations, maps, plans, sketches and 
three-dimensional works relative to geography, topography, architecture or science.   
 
(2) 
It shall, however, be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to prescribe that 
works in general or any specified categories of works shall not be protected unless they have been 
fixed in some material form.   
 
(3) 
Translations, adaptations, arrangements of music and other alterations of a literary or artistic 
work shall be protected as original works without prejudice to the copyright in the original work. 
 
(4) 
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to determine the protection to 
be granted to official texts of a legislative, administrative and legal nature, and to official translations 
of such texts. 
 
(5) 
Collections of literary or artistic works such as encyclopaedias and anthologies which, by 
reason of the selection and arrangement of their contents, constitute intellectual creations shall be 
protected as such, without prejudice to the copyright in each of the works forming part of such 
collections. 
 
(6) 
The works mentioned in this Article shall enjoy protection in all countries of the Union. This 
protection shall operate for the benefit of the author and his successors in title.   
 
(7) 
Subject to the provisions of Article 7(4) of this Convention, it shall be a matter for legislation 
in the countries of the Union to determine the extent of the application of their laws to works of 
applied art and industrial designs and models, as well as the conditions under which such works, 
designs and models shall be protected. Works protected in the country of origin solely as designs and 
models shall be entitled in another country of the Union only to such special protection as is granted 
in that country to designs and models; however, if no such special protection is granted in that 
country, such works shall be protected as artistic works.   
 
(8) 
The protection of this Convention shall not apply to news of the day or to miscellaneous facts 
having the character of mere items of press information.   
 
 
 
 
51
Article 2bis 
 
(1) 
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to exclude, wholly or in part, 
from the protection provided by the preceding Article political speeches and speeches delivered in the 
course of legal proceedings.   
 
(2) 
It shall also be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to determine the 
conditions under which lectures, addresses and other works of the same nature which are delivered in 
public may be reproduced by the press, broadcast, communicated to the public by wire and made the 
subject of public communication as envisaged in Article 11bis(1) of this Convention, when such use 
is justified by the informatory purpose.   
 
(3) 
Nevertheless, the author shall enjoy the exclusive right of making a collection of his works 
mentioned in the preceding paragraphs.   
 
 
Article 3 
 
(1) 
The protection of this Convention shall apply to:   
 
(a) 
authors who are nationals of one of the countries of the Union, for their works, 
whether published or not;   
 
(b) 
authors who are not nationals of one of the countries of the Union, for their works 
first published in one of those countries, or simultaneously in a country outside the 
Union and in a country of the Union.   
 
(2) 
Authors who are not nationals of one of the countries of the Union but who have their 
habitual residence in one of them shall, for the purposes of this Convention, be assimilated to 
nationals of that country. 
 
(3) 
The expression "published works" means works published with the consent of their authors, 
whatever may be the means of manufacture of the copies, provided that the availability of such copies 
has been such as to satisfy the reasonable requirements of the public, having regard to the nature of 
the work. The performance of a dramatic, dramatico-musical, cinematographic or musical work, the 
public recitation of a literary work, the communication by wire or the broadcasting of literary or 
artistic works, the exhibition of a work of art and the construction of a work of architecture shall not 
constitute publication.  
 
(4) 
A work shall be considered as having been published simultaneously in several countries if it 
has been published in two or more countries within thirty days of its first publication. 
 
 
Article 4 
 
 
The protection of this Convention shall apply, even if the conditions of Article 3 are not 
fulfilled, to:   
 
(a) 
authors of cinematographic works the maker of which has his headquarters or 
habitual residence in one of the countries of the Union;   
 
(b) 
authors of works of architecture erected in a country of the Union or of other artistic 
works incorporated in a building or other structure located in a country of the Union.   
 
 
52
 
Article 5 
 
(1) 
Authors shall enjoy, in respect of works for which they are protected under this Convention, 
in countries of the Union other than the country of origin, the rights which their respective laws do 
now or may hereafter grant to their nationals, as well as the rights specially granted by this 
Convention. 
 
(2) 
The enjoyment and the exercise of these rights shall not be subject to any formality; such 
enjoyment and such exercise shall be independent of the existence of protection in the country of 
origin of the work. Consequently, apart from the provisions of this Convention, the extent of 
protection, as well as the means of redress afforded to the author to protect his rights, shall be 
governed exclusively by the laws of the country where protection is claimed.   
 
(3) 
Protection in the country of origin is governed by domestic law. However, when the author is 
not a national of the country of origin of the work for which he is protected under this Convention, he 
shall enjoy in that country the same rights as national authors.   
 
(4) 
The country of origin shall be considered to be:   
 
(a) 
in the case of works first published in a country of the Union, that country; in the case 
of works published simultaneously in several countries of the Union which grant 
different terms of protection, the country whose legislation grants the shortest term of 
protection;   
 
(b) 
in the case of works published simultaneously in a country outside the Union and in a 
country of the Union, the latter country;   
 
(c) 
in the case of unpublished works or of works first published in a country outside the 
Union, without simultaneous publication in a country of the Union, the country of the 
Union of which the author is a national, provided that:   
 
(i) 
when these are cinematographic works the maker of which has his 
headquarters or his habitual residence in a country of the Union, the country 
of origin shall be that country, and   
 
(ii) 
when these are works of architecture erected in a country of the Union or 
other artistic works incorporated in a building or other structure located in a 
country of the Union, the country of origin shall be that country.   
 
 
Article 6 
 
(1) 
Where any country outside the Union fails to protect in an adequate manner the works of 
authors who are nationals of one of the countries of the Union, the latter country may restrict the 
protection given to the works of authors who are, at the date of the first publication thereof, nationals 
of the other country and are not habitually resident in one of the countries of the Union. If the country 
of first publication avails itself of this right, the other countries of the Union shall not be required to 
grant to works thus subjected to special treatment a wider protection than that granted to them in the 
country of first publication.   
 
(2) 
No restrictions introduced by virtue of the preceding paragraph shall affect the rights which 
an author may have acquired in respect of a work published in a country of the Union before such 
restrictions were put into force. 
 
(3) 
The countries of the Union which restrict the grant of copyright in accordance with this 
Article shall give notice thereof to the Director General of the World Intellectual Property 
 
 
53
Organization (hereinafter designated as "the Director General") by a written declaration specifying the 
countries in regard to which protection is restricted, and the restrictions to which rights of authors who 
are nationals of those countries are subjected. The Director General shall immediately communicate 
this declaration to all the countries of the Union.   
 
 
Article 6bis 
 
(1) 
Independently of the author's economic rights, and even after the transfer of the said rights, 
the author shall have the right to claim authorship of the work and to object to any distortion, 
mutilation or other modification of, or other derogatory action in relation to, the said work, which 
would be prejudicial to his honor or reputation.   
 
(2) 
The rights granted to the author in accordance with the preceding paragraph shall, after his 
death, be maintained, at least until the expiry of the economic rights, and shall be exercisable by the 
persons or institutions authorized by the legislation of the country where protection is claimed.  
However, those countries whose legislation, at the moment of their ratification of or accession to this 
Act, does not provide for the protection after the death of the author of all the rights set out in the 
preceding paragraph may provide that some of these rights may, after his death, cease to be 
maintained. 
 
(3) 
The means of redress for safeguarding the rights granted by this Article shall be governed by 
the legislation of the country where protection is claimed.   
 
 
Article 7 
 
(1) 
The term of protection granted by this Convention shall be the life of the author and fifty 
years after his death. 
 
(2) 
However, in the case of cinematographic works, the countries of the Union may provide that 
the term of protection shall expire fifty years after the work has been made available to the public 
with the consent of the author, or, failing such an event within fifty years from the making of such a 
work, fifty years after the making.   
 
(3) 
In the case of anonymous or pseudonymous works, the term of protection granted by this 
Convention shall expire fifty years after the work has been lawfully made available to the public.  
However, when the pseudonym adopted by the author leaves no doubt as to his identity, the term of 
protection shall be that provided in paragraph (1). If the author of an anonymous or pseudonymous 
work discloses his identity during the above-mentioned period, the term of protection applicable shall 
be that provided in paragraph (1). The countries of the Union shall not be required to protect 
anonymous or pseudonymous works in respect of which it is reasonable to presume that their author 
has been dead for fifty years.   
 
(4) 
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to determine the term of 
protection of photographic works and that of works of applied art in so far as they are protected as 
artistic works; however, this term shall last at least until the end of a period of twenty-five years from 
the making of such a work.   
 
(5) 
The term of protection subsequent to the death of the author and the terms provided by 
paragraph (2), paragraph (3) and paragraph (4) shall run from the date of death or of the event referred 
to in those paragraphs, but such terms shall always be deemed to begin on the first of January of the 
year following the death or such event.   
 
(6) 
The countries of the Union may grant a term of protection in excess of those provided by the 
preceding paragraphs. 
 
 
 
54
(7) 
Those countries of the Union bound by the Rome Act of this Convention which grant, in their 
national legislation in force at the time of signature of the present Act, shorter terms of protection than 
those provided for in the preceding paragraphs shall have the right to maintain such terms when 
ratifying or acceding to the present Act.   
 
(8) 
In any case, the term shall be governed by the legislation of the country where protection is 
claimed; however, unless the legislation of that country otherwise provides, the term shall not exceed 
the term fixed in the country of origin of the work. 
 
 
Article 7bis 
 
 
The provisions of the preceding Article shall also apply in the case of a work of joint 
authorship, provided that the terms measured from the death of the author shall be calculated from the 
death of the last surviving author.   
 
 
Article 8 
 
 
Authors of literary and artistic works protected by this Convention shall enjoy the exclusive 
right of making and of authorizing the translation of their works throughout the term of protection of 
their rights in the original works.   
 
 
Article 9 
 
(1) 
Authors of literary and artistic works protected by this Convention shall have the exclusive 
right of authorizing the reproduction of these works, in any manner or form.   
 
(2) 
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to permit the reproduction of 
such works in certain special cases, provided that such reproduction does not conflict with a normal 
exploitation of the work and does not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the author.   
(3) 
Any sound or visual recording shall be considered as a reproduction for the purposes of this 
Convention.   
 
 
Article 10 
 
(1) 
It shall be permissible to make quotations from a work which has already been lawfully made 
available to the public, provided that their making is compatible with fair practice, and their extent 
does not exceed that justified by the purpose, including quotations from newspaper articles and 
periodicals in the form of press summaries.   
 
(2) 
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union, and for special agreements 
existing or to be concluded between them, to permit the utilization, to the extent justified by the 
purpose, of literary or artistic works by way of illustration in publications, broadcasts or sound or 
visual recordings for teaching, provided such utilization is compatible with fair practice.   
 
(3) 
Where use is made of works in accordance with the preceding paragraphs of this Article, 
mention shall be made of the source, and of the name of the author if it appears thereon.   
 
 
Article 10bis 
 
(1) 
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to permit the reproduction by 
the press, the broadcasting or the communication to the public by wire of articles published in 
newspapers or periodicals on current economic, political or religious topics, and of broadcast works of 
 
 
55
the same character, in cases in which the reproduction, broadcasting or such communication thereof is 
not expressly reserved. Nevertheless, the source must always be clearly indicated; the legal 
consequences of a breach of this obligation shall be determined by the legislation of the country 
where protection is claimed. 
 
(2) 
It shall also be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to determine the 
conditions under which, for the purpose of reporting current events by means of photography, 
cinematography, broadcasting or communication to the public by wire, literary or artistic works seen 
or heard in the course of the event may, to the extent justified by the informatory purpose, be 
reproduced and made available to the public. 
 
 
Article 11 
 
(1) 
Authors of dramatic, dramatico-musical and musical works shall enjoy the exclusive right of 
authorizing:   
 
(i) 
the public performance of their works, including such public performance by any 
means or process;   
 
(ii) 
any communication to the public of the performance of their works. 
 
 
(2) 
Authors of dramatic or dramatico-musical works shall enjoy, during the full term of their 
rights in the original works, the same rights with respect to translations thereof.   
 
 
Article 11bis 
 
(1) 
Authors of literary and artistic works shall enjoy the exclusive right of authorizing: 
 
(i) 
the broadcasting of their works or the communication thereof to the public by any 
other means of wireless diffusion of signs, sounds or images;   
 
(ii) 
any communication to the public by wire or by rebroadcasting of the broadcast of the 
work, when this communication is made by an organization other than the original 
one; 
 
(iii) 
the public communication by loudspeaker or any other analogous instrument 
transmitting, by signs, sounds or images, the broadcast of the work.   
 
(2) 
It shall be a matter for legislation in the countries of the Union to determine the conditions 
under which the rights mentioned in the paragraph 1 may be exercised, but these conditions shall 
apply only in the countries where they have been prescribed. They shall not in any circumstances be 
prejudicial to the moral rights of the author, nor to his right to obtain equitable remuneration which, in 
the absence of agreement, shall be fixed by competent authority.   
 
(3) 
In the absence of any contrary stipulation, permission granted in accordance with 
paragraph (1) of this Article shall not imply permission to record, by means of instruments recording 
sounds or images, the work broadcast. It shall, however, be a matter for legislation in the countries of 
the Union to determine the regulations for ephemeral recordings made by a broadcasting organization 
by means of its own facilities and used for its own broadcasts. The preservation of these recordings in 
official archives may, on the ground of their exceptional documentary character, be authorized by 
such legislation.  
 
 
 
56
 
Article 11ter 
 
(1) 
Authors of literary works shall enjoy the exclusive right of authorizing: 
 
(i) 
the public recitation of their works, including such public recitation by any means or 
process;   
 
(ii) 
any communication to the public of the recitation of their works. 
 
(2) 
Authors of literary works shall enjoy, during the full term of their rights in the original works, 
the same rights with respect to translations thereof.   
 
 
Article 12 
 
 
Authors of literary or artistic works shall enjoy the exclusive right of authorizing adaptations, 
arrangements and other alterations of their works. 
 
 
Article 13 
 
(1) 
Each country of the Union may impose for itself reservations and conditions on the exclusive 
right granted to the author of a musical work and to the author of any words, the recording of which 
together with the musical work has already been authorized by the latter, to authorize the sound 
recording of that musical work, together with such words, if any; but all such reservations and 
conditions shall apply only in the countries which have imposed them and shall not, in any 
circumstances, be prejudicial to the rights of these authors to obtain equitable remuneration which, in 
the absence of agreement, shall be fixed by competent authority.   
 
(2) 
Recordings of musical works made in a country of the Union in accordance with Article 13(3) 
of the Conventions signed at Rome on June 2, 1928, and at Brussels on June 26, 1948, may be 
reproduced in that country without the permission of the author of the musical work until a date two 
years after that country becomes bound by this Act.   
 
(3) 
Recordings made in accordance with paragraph (1) and paragraph (2) of this Article and 
imported without permission from the parties concerned into a country where they are treated as 
infringing recordings shall be liable to seizure.   
 
 
Article 14 
 
(1) 
Authors of literary or artistic works shall have the exclusive right of authorizing:   
 
(i) 
the cinematographic adaptation and reproduction of these works, and the distribution 
of the works thus adapted or reproduced; 
 
(ii) 
the public performance and communication to the public by wire of the works thus 
adapted or reproduced.   
 
(2) 
The adaptation into any other artistic form of a cinematographic production derived from 
literary or artistic works shall, without prejudice to the authorization of the author of the 
cinematographic production, remain subject to the authorization of the authors of the original works.   
 
(3) 
The provisions of Article 13(1) shall not apply.   
 
 
 
 
57
Article 14bis 
 
(1) 
Without prejudice to the copyright in any work which may have been adapted or reproduced, 
a cinematographic work shall be protected as an original work. The owner of copyright in a 
cinematographic work shall enjoy the same rights as the author of an original work, including the 
rights referred to in the preceding Article.   
 
(2) 
(a) 
Ownership of copyright in a cinematographic work shall be a matter for legislation in 
the country where protection is claimed. 
 
(b) 
However, in the countries of the Union which, by legislation, include among the 
owners of copyright in a cinematographic work authors who have brought contributions to the 
making of the work, such authors, if they have undertaken to bring such contributions, may 
not, in the absence of any contrary or special stipulation, object to the reproduction, 
distribution, public performance, communication to the public by wire, broadcasting or any 
other communication to the public, or to the subtitling or dubbing of texts, of the work.   
 
(c) 
The question whether or not the form of the undertaking referred to above should, for 
the application of the preceding subparagraph (b), be in a written agreement or a written act of 
the same effect shall be a matter for the legislation of the country where the maker of the 
cinematographic work has his headquarters or habitual residence. However, it shall be a 
matter for the legislation of the country of the Union where protection is claimed to provide 
that the said undertaking shall be in a written agreement or a written act of the same effect. 
The countries whose legislation so provides shall notify the Director General by means of a 
written declaration, which will be immediately communicated by him to all the other 
countries of the Union.   
 
(d) 
By "contrary or special stipulation" is meant any restrictive condition which is 
relevant to the aforesaid undertaking. 
 
(3) 
Unless the national legislation provides to the contrary, the provisions of paragraph (2)(b) 
above shall not be applicable to authors of scenarios, dialogues and musical works created for the 
making of the cinematographic work, or to the principal director thereof. However, those countries of 
the Union whose legislation does not contain rules providing for the application of the said paragraph 
(2)(b) to such director shall notify the Director General by means of a written declaration, which will 
be immediately communicated by him to all the other countries of the Union. 
 
 
Article 14ter 
 
(1) 
The author, or after his death the persons or institutions authorized by national legislation, 
shall, with respect to original works of art and original manuscripts of writers and composers, enjoy 
the inalienable right to an interest in any sale of the work subsequent to the first transfer by the author 
of the work. 
 
(2) 
The protection provided by the preceding paragraph may be claimed in a country of the Union 
only if legislation in the country to which the author belongs so permits, and to the extent permitted 
by the country where this protection is claimed.   
 
(3) 
The procedure for collection and the amounts shall be matters for determination by national 
legislation. 
 
 
Article 15 
 
(1) 
In order that the author of a literary or artistic work protected by this Convention shall, in the 
absence of proof to the contrary, be regarded as such, and consequently be entitled to institute 
 
 
58
infringement proceedings in the countries of the Union, it shall be sufficient for his name to appear on 
the work in the usual manner. This paragraph shall be applicable even if this name is a pseudonym, 
where the pseudonym adopted by the author leaves no doubt as to his identity.   
 
(2) 
The person or body corporate whose name appears on a cinematographic work in the usual 
manner shall, in the absence of proof to the contrary, be presumed to be the maker of the said work. 
 
(3) 
In the case of anonymous and pseudonymous works, other than those referred to in 
paragraph (1) above, the publisher whose name appears on the work shall, in the absence of proof to 
the contrary, be deemed to represent the author, and in this capacity he shall be entitled to protect and 
enforce the author's rights. The provisions of this paragraph shall cease to apply when the author 
reveals his identity and establishes his claim to authorship of the work.   
 
(4) 
(a) 
In the case of unpublished works where the identity of the author is unknown, but 
where there is every ground to presume that he is a national of a country of the Union, it shall 
be a matter for legislation in that country to designate the competent authority which shall 
represent the author and shall be entitled to protect and enforce his rights in the countries of 
the Union.   
 
(b) 
Countries of the Union which make such designation under the terms of this 
provision shall notify the Director General by means of a written declaration giving full 
information concerning the authority thus designated. The Director General shall at once 
communicate this declaration to all other countries of the Union.   
 
 
Article 16 
 
(1) 
Infringing copies of a work shall be liable to seizure in any country of the Union where the 
work enjoys legal protection.   
 
(2) 
The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall also apply to reproductions coming from a 
country where the work is not protected, or has ceased to be protected.   
 
(3) 
The seizure shall take place in accordance with the legislation of each country.   
 
 
Article 17 
 
 
The provisions of this Convention cannot in any way affect the right of the Government of 
each country of the Union to permit, to control, or to prohibit, by legislation or regulation, the 
circulation, presentation, or exhibition of any work or production in regard to which the competent 
authority may find it necessary to exercise that right.   
 
 
Article 18 
 
(1) 
This Convention shall apply to all works which, at the moment of its coming into force, have 
not yet fallen into the public domain in the country of origin through the expiry of the term of 
protection. 
 
(2) 
If, however, through the expiry of the term of protection which was previously granted, a 
work has fallen into the public domain of the country where protection is claimed, that work shall not 
be protected anew. 
 
(3) 
The application of this principle shall be subject to any provisions contained in special 
conventions to that effect existing or to be concluded between countries of the Union. In the absence 
 
 
59
of such provisions, the respective countries shall determine, each in so far as it is concerned, the 
conditions of application of this principle.   
 
(4) 
The preceding provisions shall also apply in the case of new accessions to the Union and to 
cases in which protection is extended by the application of Article 7 or by the abandonment of 
reservations. 
 
 
Article 19 
 
 
The provisions of this Convention shall not preclude the making of a claim to the benefit of 
any greater protection which may be granted by legislation in a country of the Union. 
 
 
Article 20 
 
 
The Governments of the countries of the Union reserve the right to enter into special 
agreements among themselves, in so far as such agreements grant to authors more extensive rights 
than those granted by the Convention, or contain other provisions not contrary to this Convention. The 
provisions of existing agreements which satisfy these conditions shall remain applicable.   
 
 
Article 21 
 
(1) 
Special provisions regarding developing countries are included in the Appendix. 
 
(2) 
Subject to the provisions of Article 28(1)(b), the Appendix forms an integral part of this Act. 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
Article I 
 
(1) 
Any country regarded as a developing country in conformity with the established practice of 
the General Assembly of the United Nations which ratifies or accedes to this Act, of which this 
Appendix forms an integral part, and which, having regard to its economic situation and its social or 
cultural needs, does not consider itself immediately in a position to make provision for the protection 
of all the rights as provided for in this Act, may, by a notification deposited with the Director General 
at the time of depositing its instrument of ratification or accession or, subject to Article V(1)(c), at any 
time thereafter, declare that it will avail itself of the faculty provided for in Article II, or of the faculty 
provided for in Article III, or of both of those faculties. It may, instead of availing itself of the faculty 
provided for in Article II, make a declaration according to Article V(1)(a).   
 
(2) 
(a) 
Any declaration under paragraph (1) notified before the expiration of the period of ten 
years from the entry into force of Article 1 to Article 21 and this Appendix according to 
Article 28(2) shall be effective until the expiration of the said period. Any such declaration 
may be renewed in whole or in part for periods of ten years each by a notification deposited 
with the Director General not more than fifteen months and not less than three months before 
the expiration of the ten-year period then running. 
 
(b) 
Any declaration under paragraph (1) notified after the expiration of the period of ten 
years from the entry into force of Article 1 to Article 21 and this Appendix according to 
Article 28(2) shall be effective until the expiration of the ten-year period then running. Any 
such declaration may be renewed as provided for in the second sentence of subparagraph (a).   
 
 
 
60
(3) 
Any country of the Union which has ceased to be regarded as a developing country as 
referred to in paragraph (1) shall no longer be entitled to renew its declaration as provided in 
paragraph (2), and, whether or not it formally withdraws its declaration, such country shall be 
precluded from availing itself of the faculties referred to in paragraph (1) from the expiration of the 
ten-year period then running or from the expiration of a period of three years after it has ceased to be 
regarded as a developing country, whichever period expires later.   
 
(4) 
Where, at the time when the declaration made under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) ceases to 
be effective, there are copies in stock which were made under a license granted by virtue of this 
Appendix, such copies may continue to be distributed until their stock is exhausted. 
 
(5) 
Any country which is bound by the provisions of this Act and which has deposited a 
declaration or a notification in accordance with Article 31(1) with respect to the application of this 
Act to a particular territory, the situation of which can be regarded as analogous to that of the 
countries referred to in paragraph (1), may, in respect of such territory, make the declaration referred 
to in paragraph (1) and the notification of renewal referred to in paragraph (2). As long as such 
declaration or notification remains in effect, the provisions of this Appendix shall be applicable to the 
territory in respect of which it was made.   
 
(6) 
(a) 
The fact that a country avails itself of any of the faculties referred to in paragraph (1) 
does not permit another country to give less protection to works of which the country of 
origin is the former country than it is obliged to grant under Article 1 to Article 20.   
 
(b) 
The right to apply reciprocal treatment provided for in Article 30(2)(b), second 
sentence, shall not, until the date on which the period applicable under Article I(3) expires, be 
exercised in respect of works the country of origin of which is a country which has made a 
declaration according to Article V(1)(a). 
 
Article II 
 
(1) 
Any country which has declared that it will avail itself of the faculty provided for in this 
Article shall be entitled, so far as works published in printed or analogous forms of reproduction are 
concerned, to substitute for the exclusive right of translation provided for in Article 8 a system of 
non-exclusive and non-transferable licenses, granted by the competent authority under the following 
conditions and subject to Article IV.   
 
(2) 
(a) 
Subject to paragraph (3), if, after the expiration of a period of three years, or of any 
longer period determined by the national legislation of the said country, commencing on the 
date of the first publication of the work, a translation of such work has not been published in a 
language in general use in that country by the owner of the right of translation, or with his 
authorization, any national of such country may obtain a license to make a translation of the 
work in the said language and publish the translation in printed or analogous forms of 
reproduction.   
 
(b) 
A license under the conditions provided for in this Article may also be granted if all 
the editions of the translation published in the language concerned are out of print.   
 
(3) 
(a) 
In the case of translations into a language which is not in general use in one or more 
developed countries which are members of the Union, a period of one year shall be 
substituted for the period of three years referred to in paragraph (2)(a).   
 
(b) 
Any country referred to in paragraph (1) may, with the unanimous agreement of the 
developed countries which are members of the Union and in which the same language is in 
general use, substitute, in the case of translations into that language, for the period of three 
years referred to in paragraph (2)(a) a shorter period as determined by such agreement but not 
less than one year. However, the provisions of the foregoing sentence shall not apply where 
 
 
61
the language in question is English, French or Spanish. The Director General shall be notified 
of any such agreement by the Governments which have concluded it.   
 
(4) 
(a) 
No license obtainable after three years shall be granted under this Article until a 
further period of six months has elapsed, and no license obtainable after one year shall be 
granted under this Article until a further period of nine months has elapsed  
 
(i) 
from the date on which the applicant complies with the requirements mentioned in 
Article IV(1), or  
 
(ii) 
where the identity or the address of the owner of the right of translation is unknown, 
from the date on which the applicant sends, as provided for in Article IV(2), copies of 
his application submitted to the authority competent to grant the license.   
 
(b) 
If, during the said period of six or nine months, a translation in the language in 
respect of which the application was made is published by the owner of the right of 
translation or with his authorization, no license under this Article shall be granted.   
 
(5) 
Any license under this Article shall be granted only for the purpose of teaching, scholarship 
or research.   
 
(6) 
If a translation of a work is published by the owner of the right of translation or with his 
authorization at a price reasonably related to that normally charged in the country for comparable 
works, any license granted under this Article shall terminate if such translation is in the same 
language and with substantially the same content as the translation published under the license. Any 
copies already made before the license terminates may continue to be distributed until their stock is 
exhausted.   
 
(7) 
For works which are composed mainly of illustrations, a license to make and publish a 
translation of the text and to reproduce and publish the illustrations may be granted only if the 
conditions of Article III are also fulfilled.   
 
(8) 
No license shall be granted under this Article when the author has withdrawn from circulation 
all copies of his work.   
 
(9) 
(a) 
A license to make a translation of a work which has been published in printed or 
analogous forms of reproduction may also be granted to any broadcasting organization having 
its headquarters in a country referred to in paragraph (1), upon an application made to the 
competent authority of that country by the said organization, provided that all of the following 
conditions are met: 
 
(i) 
the translation is made from a copy made and acquired in accordance with the 
laws of the said country;   
 
(ii) 
the translation is only for use in broadcasts intended exclusively for teaching 
or for the dissemination of the results of specialized technical or scientific 
research to experts in a particular profession;   
 
(iii) 
the translation is used exclusively for the purposes referred to in 
condition (ii) through broadcasts made lawfully and intended for 
recipients on the territory of the said country, including broadcasts 
made through the medium of sound or visual recordings lawfully and 
exclusively made for the purpose of such broadcasts;   
 
(iv) 
all uses made of the translation are without any commercial purpose.   
 
 
 
62
(b) 
Sound or visual recordings of a translation which was made by a broadcasting 
organization under a license granted by virtue of this paragraph may, for the purposes and 
subject to the conditions referred to in subparagraph (a) and with the agreement of that 
organization, also be used by any other broadcasting organization having its headquarters in 
the country whose competent authority granted the license in question.   
 
(c) 
Provided that all of the criteria and conditions set out in subparagraph (a) are met, a 
license may also be granted to a broadcasting organization to translate any text incorporated 
in an audio-visual fixation where such fixation was itself prepared and published for the sole 
purpose of being used in connection with systematic instructional activities.   
 
(d) 
Subject to subparagraph (a) to subparagraph (c), the provisions of the preceding 
paragraphs shall apply to the grant and exercise of any license granted under this paragraph. 
 
 
Article III 
 
(1) 
Any country which has declared that it will avail itself of the faculty provided for in this 
Article shall be entitled to substitute for the exclusive right of reproduction provided for in Article 9 a 
system of non-exclusive and non-transferable licenses, granted by the competent authority under the 
following conditions and subject to Article IV. 
 
(2) 
(a) 
If, in relation to a work to which this Article applies by virtue of paragraph (7), after 
the expiration of  
 
(i) 
the relevant period specified in paragraph (3), commencing on the date of 
first publication of a particular edition of the work, or   
 
(ii) 
any longer period determined by national legislation of the country referred 
to in paragraph (1), commencing on the same date, copies of such edition 
have not been distributed in that country to the general public or in 
connection with systematic instructional activities, by the owner of the right 
of reproduction or with his authorization, at a price reasonably related to that 
normally charged in the country for comparable works, any national of such 
country may obtain a license to reproduce and publish such edition at that or 
a lower price for use in connection with systematic instructional activities.   
 
(b) 
A license to reproduce and publish an edition which has been distributed as described 
in subparagraph (a) may also be granted under the conditions provided for in this Article if, 
after the expiration of the applicable period, no authorized copies of that edition have been on 
sale for a period of six months in the country concerned to the general public or in connection 
with systematic instructional activities at a price reasonably related to that normally charged 
in the country for comparable works.   
 
(3) 
The period referred to in paragraph (2)(a)(i) shall be five years, except that   
 
(i) 
for works of the natural and physical sciences, including mathematics, and of 
technology, the period shall be three years;   
 
(ii) 
for works of fiction, poetry, drama and music, and for art books, the period shall be 
seven years. 
 
(4) 
(a) 
No license obtainable after three years shall be granted under this Article until a 
period of six months has elapsed  
 
(i) 
from the date on which the applicant complies with the requirements 
mentioned in Article IV(1), or   
 
 
63
 
(ii) 
where the identity or the address of the owner of the right of reproduction is 
unknown, from the date on which the applicant sends, as provided for in 
Article IV(2), copies of his application submitted to the authority competent 
to grant the license.   
 
(b) 
Where licenses are obtainable after other periods and Article IV(2) is applicable, no 
license shall be granted until a period of three months has elapsed from the date of the 
dispatch of the copies of the application. 
 
(c) 
If, during the period of six or three months referred to in subparagraph (a) and 
subparagraph (b), a distribution as described in paragraph (2)(a) has taken place, no license 
shall be granted under this Article. 
 
(d) 
No license shall be granted if the author has withdrawn from circulation all copies of 
the edition for the reproduction and publication of which the license has been applied for. 
 
(5) 
A license to reproduce and publish a translation of a work shall not be granted under this 
Article in the following cases: 
 
(i) 
where the translation was not published by the owner of the right of translation or 
with his authorization, or 
 
(ii) 
where the translation is not in a language in general use in the country in which the 
license is applied for.   
 
(6) 
If copies of an edition of a work are distributed in the country referred to in paragraph (1) to 
the general public or in connection with systematic instructional activities, by the owner of the right of 
reproduction or with his authorization, at a price reasonably related to that normally charged in the 
country for comparable works, any license granted under this Article shall terminate if such edition is 
in the same language and with substantially the same content as the edition which was published 
under the said license. Any copies already made before the license terminates may continue to be 
distributed until their stock is exhausted.   
 
(7) 
(a) 
Subject to subparagraph (b), the works to which this Article applies shall be limited to 
works published in printed or analogous forms of reproduction.   
 
(b) 
This Article shall also apply to the reproduction in audio-visual form of lawfully 
made audio-visual fixations including any protected works incorporated therein and to the 
translation of any incorporated text into a language in general use in the country in which the 
license is applied for, always provided that the audio-visual fixations in question were 
prepared and published for the sole purpose of being used in connection with systematic 
instructional activities. 
 
 
Article IV 
 
(1) 
A license under Article II or Article III may be granted only if the applicant, in accordance 
with the procedure of the country concerned, establishes either that he has requested, and has been 
denied, authorization by the owner of the right to make and publish the translation or to reproduce and 
publish the edition, as the case may be, or that, after due diligence on his part, he was unable to find 
the owner of the right. At the same time as making the request, the applicant shall inform any national 
or international information center referred to in paragraph (2).   
 
(2) 
If the owner of the right cannot be found, the applicant for a license shall send, by registered 
airmail, copies of his application, submitted to the authority competent to grant the license, to the 
publisher whose name appears on the work and to any national or international information center 
 
 
64
which may have been designated, in a notification to that effect deposited with the Director General, 
by the Government of the country in which the publisher is believed to have his principal place of 
business.   
 
(3) 
The name of the author shall be indicated on all copies of the translation or reproduction 
published under a license granted under Article II or Article III. The title of the work shall appear on 
all such copies. In the case of a translation, the original title of the work shall appear in any case on all 
the said copies.   
 
(4) 
(a) 
No license granted under Article II or Article III shall extend to the export of copies, 
and any such license shall be valid only for publication of the translation or of the 
reproduction, as the case may be, in the territory of the country in which it has been applied 
for.   
 
(b) 
For the purposes of subparagraph (a), the notion of export shall include the sending of 
copies from any territory to the country which, in respect of that territory, has made a 
declaration under Article I(5).   
 
(c) 
Where a governmental or other public entity of a country which has granted a license 
to make a translation under Article II into a language other than English, French or Spanish 
sends copies of a translation published under such license to another country, such sending of 
copies shall not, for the purposes of subparagraph (a), be considered to constitute export if all 
of the following conditions are met: 
 
(i) 
the recipients are individuals who are nationals of the country whose 
competent authority has granted the license, or organizations grouping such 
individuals;   
(ii) 
the copies are to be used only for the purpose of teaching, scholarship or 
research; 
 
(iii) 
the sending of the copies and their subsequent  distribution to recipients is 
without any commercial purpose;  and   
 
(iv) 
the country to which the copies have been sent has agreed with the country 
whose competent authority has granted the license to allow the receipt, or 
distribution, or both, and the Director General has been notified of the 
agreement by the Government of the country in which the license has been 
granted.   
 
(5) 
All copies published under a license granted by virtue of Article II or Article III shall bear a 
notice in the appropriate language stating that the copies are available for distribution only in the 
country or territory to which the said license applies.   
 
(6) 
(a) 
Due provision shall be made at the national level to ensure   
 
(i) 
that the license provides, in favour of the owner of the right of translation or 
of reproduction, as the case may be, for just compensation that is consistent 
with standards of royalties normally operating on licenses freely negotiated 
between persons in the two countries concerned, and   
 
(ii) 
payment and transmittal of the compensation: should national currency 
regulations intervene, the competent authority shall make all efforts, by the 
use of international machinery, to ensure transmittal in internationally 
convertible currency or its equivalent. 
 
(b) 
Due provision shall be made by national legislation to ensure a correct translation of 
the work, or an accurate reproduction of the particular edition, as the case may be. 
 
 
65
 
Article V 
 
(1) 
(a) 
Any country entitled to make a declaration that it will avail itself of the faculty 
provided for in Article II may, instead, at the time of ratifying or acceding to this Act:   
 
(i) 
if it is a country to which Article 30(2)(a) applies, make a declaration under 
that provision as far as the right of translation is concerned;   
 
(ii) 
if it is a country to which Article 30(2)(a) does not apply, and even if it is not 
a country outside the Union, make a declaration as provided for in 
Article 30(2)(b), first sentence.   
 
(b) 
In the case of a country which ceases to be regarded as a developing country as 
referred to in Article I(1), a declaration made according to this paragraph shall be effective 
until the date on which the period applicable under Article I(3) expires.   
 
(c) 
Any country which has made a declaration according to this paragraph may not 
subsequently avail itself of the faculty provided for in Article II even if it withdraws the said 
declaration. 
 
(2) 
Subject to paragraph (3), any country which has availed itself of the faculty provided for in 
Article II may not subsequently make a declaration according to paragraph (1).   
 
(3) 
Any country which has ceased to be regarded as a developing country as referred to in 
Article I(1) may, not later than two years prior to the expiration of the period applicable under 
Article I(3), make a declaration to the effect provided for in Article 30(2)(b), first sentence, 
notwithstanding the fact that it is not a country outside the Union. Such declaration shall take effect at 
the date on which the period applicable under Article I(3) expires. 
 
 
Article VI 
 
(1) 
Any country of the Union may declare, as from the date of this Act, and at any time before 
becoming bound by Article 1 to Article 21 and this Appendix:   
 
(i) 
if it is a country which, were it bound by Article 1 to Article 21 and this Appendix, 
would be entitled to avail itself of the faculties referred to in Article I(1), that it will 
apply the provisions of Article II or of Article III or of both to works whose country 
of origin is a country which, pursuant to (ii) below, admits the application of those 
Articles to such works, or which is bound by Article 1 to Article 21 and this 
Appendix; such declaration may, instead of referring to Article II, refer to Article V;   
 
(ii) 
that it admits the application of this Appendix to works of which it is the country of 
origin by countries which have made a declaration under (i) above or a notification 
under Article I. 
 
(2) 
Any declaration made under paragraph (1) shall be in writing and shall be deposited with the 
Director General. The declaration shall become effective from the date of its deposit.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66
 
 
 
 
THE ROME CONVENTION 
 
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF PERFORMERS, 
PRODUCERS OF PHONOGRAMS AND BROADCASTING ORGANIZATIONS 
 
(ROME CONVENTION) 
 
Articles 1 through 22 
 
 
Table of Contents* 
 
Article 1 
 
Safeguard of Copyright Proper 
Article 2 
 
Protection given by the Convention, Definition of National  
 
 
 
Treatment 
Article 3 
 
Definitions:  (a) Performers;  (b) Phonogram;  (c) Producers  
 
 
 
of Phonograms;  (d) Publication;  (e) Reproduction;   
 
 
 
(f) Broadcasting;  (g) Rebroadcasting 
Article 4 
 
Performances Protected.  Points of Attachment for  
 
 
 
Performers 
Article 5 
 
Protected Phonograms:  1.  Points of Attachment for  
 
 
 
Producers of Phonograms;  2.  Simultaneous Publication;   
 
 
 
3.  Power to exclude certain Criteria 
Article 6 
 
Protected Broadcasts:  1.  Points of Attachment for  
 
 
 
Broadcasting Organizations;  2.  Power to Reserve 
Article 7 
 
Minimum Protection for Performers:  1.  Particular Rights;   
 
 
 
2.  Relations between Performers and Broadcasting  
 
 
 
Organizations 
Article 8 
 
Performers acting jointly 
Article 9 
 
Variety and Circus Artists 
Article 10 
 
Right of Reproduction for Phonogram Producers 
Article 11 
 
Formalities for Phonograms 
Article 12 
 
Secondary Uses of Phonograms 
Article 13 
 
Minimum Rights for Broadcasting Organizations 
Article 14 
 
Minimum Duration of Protection 
Article 15 
 
Permitted Exceptions:  1.  Specific Limitations;   
 
 
 
2.  Equivalents with copyright 
Article 16 
 
Reservations 
Article 17 
 
Certain countries applying only the "fixation" criterion 
Article 18 
 
Withdrawal of reservations 
Article 19 
 
Performers' Rights in Films 
Article 20 
 
Non-retroactivity 
Article 21 
 
Protection by other means 
Article 22 
 
Special agreements 
 
 
 
 
_______________ 
 
*According to WIPO publication no. 328, the Table of Contents as reproduced therein did not 
appear in the signed text of the Convention but was added for the convenience of the reader.  We are 
thankful to WIPO for providing us with the text of the Convention, including the Table of Contents, 
on diskette for the purpose of facilitating reproduction in this book.   
 
 
67
 
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF PERFORMERS, 
PRODUCERS OF PHONOGRAMS AND BROADCASTING ORGANISATIONS 
 
(ROME CONVENTION) 
 
ARTICLES 1 THROUGH 22 
 
 
Article 1 
 
 
Protection granted under this Convention shall leave intact and shall in no way affect the 
protection of copyright in literary and artistic works.  Consequently, no provision of this Convention 
may be interpreted as prejudicing such protection. 
 
 
Article 2 
 
1. 
For the purposes of this Convention, national treatment shall mean the treatment accorded by 
the domestic law of the Contracting State in which protection is claimed:   
 
(a) 
to performers who are its nationals, as regards performances taking place, broadcast, 
or first fixed, on its territory; 
 
(b) 
to producers of phonograms who are its nationals, as regards phonograms first fixed 
or first published on its territory; 
 
(c) 
to broadcasting organisations which have their headquarters on its territory, as 
regards broadcasts transmitted from transmitters situated on its territory. 
 
2. 
National treatment shall be subject to the protection specifically guaranteed, and the 
limitations  
specifically provided for, in this Convention.   
 
 
Article 3 
 
 
For the purposes of this Convention: 
 
(a) 
"performers" means actors, singers, musicians, dancers, and other persons who act, 
sing, deliver, declaim, play in, or otherwise perform literary or artistic works; 
 
(b) 
"phonogram" means any exclusively aural fixation of sounds of a performance or of 
other sounds;   
 
(c) 
"producer of phonograms" means the person who, or the legal entity which, first fixes 
the sounds of a performance or other sounds;   
 
(d) 
"publication" means the offering of copies of a phonogram to the public in reasonable 
quantity;   
 
(e) 
"reproduction" means the making of a copy or copies of a fixation;   
 
(f) 
"broadcasting" means the transmission by wireless means for public reception of 
sounds or of images and sounds;   
 
 
 
68
(g) 
"rebroadcasting" means the simultaneous broadcasting by one broadcasting 
organisation of the broadcast of another broadcasting organisation.   
 
 
Article 4 
 
 
Each Contracting State shall grant national treatment to performers if any of the following 
conditions is met: 
 
(a) 
the performance takes place in another Contracting State; 
 
(b) 
the performance is incorporated in a phonogram which is protected under Article 5 of 
this Convention;   
 
(c) 
the performance, not being fixed on a phonogram, is carried by a broadcast which is 
protected by Article 6 of this Convention. 
 
 
Article 5 
 
1. 
Each Contracting State shall grant national treatment to producers of phonograms if any of 
the following conditions is met: 
 
(a) 
the producer of the phonogram is a national of another Contracting State (criterion of 
nationality); 
 
(b) 
the first fixation of the sound was made in another Contracting State (criterion of 
fixation); 
 
(c) 
the phonogram was first published in another Contracting State (criterion of 
publication). 
 
2. 
If a phonogram was first published in a non-contracting State but if it was also published, 
within thirty days of its first publication, in a Contracting State (simultaneous publication), it shall be 
considered as first published in the Contracting State.   
 
3. 
By means of a notification deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, any 
Contracting State may declare that it will not apply the criterion of publication or, alternatively, the 
criterion of fixation.  Such notification may be deposited at the time of ratification, acceptance or 
accession, or at any time thereafter;  in the last case, it shall become effective six months after it has 
been deposited.   
 
 
Article 6 
 
1. 
Each Contracting State shall grant national treatment to broadcasting organisations if either of 
the following conditions is met:   
 
(a) 
the headquarters of the broadcasting organisation is situated in another Contracting 
State;   
 
(b) 
the broadcast was transmitted from a transmitter situated in another Contracting State. 
 
2. 
By means of a notification deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations, any 
Contracting State may declare that it will protect broadcasts only if the headquarters of the 
broadcasting organisation is situated in another Contracting State and the broadcast was transmitted 
from a transmitter situated in the same Contracting State.  Such notification may be deposited at the 
 
 
69
time of ratification, acceptance or accession, or at any time thereafter; in the last case, it shall become 
effective six months after it has been deposited. 
 
 
Article 7 
 
1. 
The protection provided for performers by this Convention shall include the possibility of 
preventing:   
 
(a) 
the broadcasting and the communication to the public, without their consent, of their 
performance, except where the performance used in the broadcasting or the public 
communication is itself already a broadcast performance or is made from a fixation;   
 
(b) 
the fixation, without their consent, of their unfixed performance; 
 
(c) 
the reproduction, without their consent, of a fixation of their performance: 
 
(i) 
if the original fixation itself was made without their consent; 
 
(ii) 
if the reproduction is made for purposes different from those for which the 
performers gave their consent; 
 
(iii) 
if the original fixation was made in accordance with the provisions of 
Article 15, and the reproduction is made for purposes different from 
those referred to in those provisions. 
 
2. 
(1) 
If broadcasting was consented to by the performers, it shall be a matter for the 
domestic law of the Contracting State where protection is claimed to regulate the protection 
against rebroadcasting, fixation for broadcasting purposes and the reproduction of such 
fixation for broadcasting purposes. 
 
(2) 
The terms and conditions governing the use by broadcasting organisations of 
fixations made for broadcasting purposes shall be determined in accordance with the domestic 
law of the Contracting State where protection is claimed. 
 
(3) 
However, the domestic law referred to in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph 
shall not operate to deprive performers of the ability to control, by contract, their relations 
with broadcasting organisations.   
 
 
Article 8 
 
 
Any Contracting State may, by its domestic laws and regulations, specify the manner in 
which performers will be represented in connexion with the exercise of their rights if several of them 
participate in the same performance. 
 
 
Article 9 
 
 
Any Contracting State may, by its domestic laws and regulations, extend the protection 
provided for in this Convention to artists who do not perform literary or artistic works. 
 
Article 10 
 
 
Producers of phonograms shall enjoy the right to authorise or prohibit the direct or indirect 
reproduction of their phonograms.   
 
 
 
70
 
Article 11 
 
 
If, as a condition of protecting the rights of producers of phonograms, or of performers, or 
both, in relation to phonograms, a Contracting State, under its domestic law, requires compliance with 
formalities, these shall be considered as fulfilled if all the copies in commerce of the published 
phonogram or their containers bear a notice consisting of the symbol (P), accompanied by the year 
date of the first publication, placed in such a manner as to give reasonable notice of claim of 
protection; and if the copies or their containers do not identify the producer or the licensee of the 
producer (by carrying his name, trade mark or other appropriate designation), the notice shall also 
include the name of the owner of the rights of the producer; and, furthermore, if the copies or their 
containers do not identify the principal performers, the notice shall also include the name of the 
person who, in the country in which the fixation was effected, owns the rights of such performers.   
 
 
Article 12 
 
 
If a phonogram published for commercial purposes, or a reproduction of such phonogram, is 
used directly for broadcasting or for any communication to the public, a single equitable remuneration 
shall be paid by the user to the performers, or to the producers of the phonograms, or to both.  
Domestic law may, in the absence of agreement between these parties, lay down the conditions as to 
the sharing of this remuneration.   
 
 
Article 13 
 
 
Broadcasting organisations shall enjoy the right to authorise or prohibit:   
 
(a) 
the rebroadcasting of their broadcasts;   
 
(b) 
the fixation of their broadcasts;   
 
(c) 
the reproduction:   
 
(i) 
of fixations, made without their consent, of their broadcasts; 
 
(ii) 
of fixations, made in accordance with the provisions of Article 15, of their 
broadcasts, if the reproduction is made for purposes different from those 
referred to in those provisions;   
 
(d) 
the communication to the public of their television broadcasts if such communication 
is made in places accessible to the public against payment of an entrance fee; it shall be a 
matter for the domestic law of the State where protection of this right is claimed to determine 
the conditions under which it may be exercised. 
 
 
Article 14 
 
 
The term of protection to be granted under this Convention shall last at least until the end of a 
period of twenty years computed from the end of the year in which:   
 
 
(a) 
the fixation was made - for phonograms and for performances incorporated therein; 
 
 
(b) 
the performance took place - for performances not incorporated in phonograms; 
 
 
(c) 
the broadcast took place - for broadcasts.   
 
 
 
71
 
Article 15 
 
1. 
Any Contracting State may, in its domestic laws and regulations, provide for exceptions to the 
protection guaranteed by this Convention as regards:   
 
 
(a) 
private use; 
 
 
(b) 
use of short excerpts in connexion with the reporting of current events; 
 
(c) 
ephemeral fixation by a broadcasting organisation by means of its own facilities and 
for its own broadcasts;   
 
 
(d) 
use solely for the purposes of teaching or scientific research. 
 
2. 
Irrespective of paragraph 1 of this Article, any Contracting State may, in its domestic laws 
and regulations, provide for the same kinds of limitations with regard to the protection of performers, 
producers of phonograms and broadcasting organisations, as it provides for, in its domestic laws and 
regulations, in connexion with the protection of copyright in literary and artistic works.  However, 
compulsory licences may be provided for only to the extent to which they are compatible with this 
Convention.   
 
 
Article 16 
 
1. 
Any State, upon becoming party to this Convention, shall be bound by all the obligations and 
shall enjoy all the benefits thereof.  However, a State may at any time, in a notification deposited with 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, declare that: 
 
 
(a) 
as regards Article 12:   
 
(i) 
it will not apply the provisions of that Article;   
 
(ii) 
it will not apply the provisions of that Article in respect of certain uses; 
 
(iii) 
as regards phonograms the producer of which is not a national of 
another Contracting State, it will not apply that Article; 
 
(iv) 
as regards phonograms the producer of which is a national of another 
Contracting State, it will limit the protection provided for by that Article to 
the extent to which, and to the term for which, the latter State grants 
protection to phonograms first fixed by a national of the State making the 
declaration;  however, the fact that the Contracting State of which the 
producer is a national does not grant the protection to the same beneficiary or 
beneficiaries as the State making the declaration shall not be considered as a 
difference in the extent of the protection; 
 
(b) 
as regards Article 13, it will not apply item (d) of that Article; if a Contracting State 
makes such a declaration, the other Contracting States shall not be obliged to grant the right 
referred to in Article 13, item (d), to broadcasting organisations whose headquarters are in 
that State.   
 
2. 
If the notification referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article is made after the date of the 
deposit of the instrument of ratification, acceptance or accession, the declaration will become 
effective six months after it has been deposited.   
 
 
 
 
72
Article 17 
 
 
Any State which, on October 26, 1961, grants protection to producers of phonograms solely 
on the basis of the criterion of fixation may, by a notification deposited with the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations at the time of ratification, acceptance or accession, declare that it will apply, for 
the purposes of Article 5, the criterion of fixation alone and, for the purposes of paragraph 1(a)(iii)  
and (iv) of Article 16, the criterion of fixation instead of the criterion of nationality.   
 
 
Article 18 
 
 
Any State which has deposited a notification under paragraph 3 of Article 5, paragraph 2 of 
Article 6, paragraph 1 of Article 16 or Article 17, may, by a further notification deposited with the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations, reduce its scope or withdraw it. 
 
 
Article 19 
 
 
Notwithstanding anything in this Convention, once a performer has consented to the 
incorporation of his performance in a visual or audio-visual fixation, Article 7 shall have no further 
application. 
 
 
Article 20 
 
1. 
This Convention shall not prejudice rights acquired in any Contracting State before the date 
of coming into force of this Convention for that State. 
 
2. 
No Contracting State shall be bound to apply the provisions of this Convention to 
performances or broadcasts which took place, or to phonograms which were fixed, before the date of 
coming into force of this Convention for that State. 
 
 
Article 21 
 
 
The protection provided for in this Convention shall not prejudice any protection otherwise 
secured to performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organisations. 
 
 
Article 22 
 
 
Contracting States reserve the right to enter into special agreements among themselves in so 
far as such agreements grant to performers, producers of phonograms or broadcasting organisations 
more extensive rights than those granted by this Convention or contain other provisions not contrary 
to this Convention. 
 
 
 
73
THE WASHINGTON TREATY 
 
 
 
TREATY ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN RESPECT OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 
 
(WASHINGTON TREATY) 
 
Articles 2 through 7 (other than 6(3)), 12 and 16(3) 
 
 
Table of Contents* 
 
 
 
Article 2 
 
Definitions 
 
Article 3 
 
The Subject Matter of the Treaty 
 
Article 4 
 
The Legal Form of the Protection 
 
Article 5 
 
National Treatment 
 
Article 6 
 
The Scope of the Protection 
 Paragraph 1      
 
Acts Requiring the Authorization of the  
  
 
 
 
Holder of the Right  
 Paragraph 2      
 
Acts Not Requiring the Authorization of  
  
 
 
 
the Holder of the Right 
 Paragraph 4      
 
Sale and Distribution of Infringing Integrated  
  
 
 
 
Circuits Acquired Innocently 
 Paragraph 5      
 
Exhaustion of Rights 
 
Article 7 
 
Exploitation;  Registration, Disclosure 
 
Article 12 
 
Safeguard of Paris and Berne Conventions 
 
Article 16 
 
Entry Into Force of the Treaty 
 Paragraph 3  
 
Protection of Layout-Designs (Topographies)  
  
 
 
 
Existing at Time of Entry Into Force 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________ 
  
*We are thankful to WIPO for providing us with the text of the Treaty, as it appears in WIPO 
publication no. 202, on diskette for the purpose of facilitating reproduction in this book.   
 
 
 
74
TREATY ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IN 
RESPECT OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 
 
(WASHINGTON TREATY) 
 
ARTICLES 2 THROUGH 7 (OTHER THAN 6(3)), 12 AND 16(3) 
 
Article 2 
 
Definitions 
 
For the purposes of this Treaty:   
 
(i) 
"integrated circuit" means a product, in its final form or an intermediate form, 
in which the elements, at least one of which is an active element, and some or 
all of the interconnections are integrally formed in and/or on a piece of 
material and which is intended to perform an electronic function, 
 
(ii) 
"layout-design (topography)" means the three-dimensional disposition, 
however expressed, of the elements, at least one of which is an active 
element, and of some or all of the interconnections of an integrated circuit, or 
such a three-dimensional disposition prepared for an integrated circuit 
intended for manufacture,  
 
(iii) 
"holder of the right" means the natural person who, or the legal entity which, 
according to the applicable law, is to be regarded as the beneficiary 
of the protection referred to in Article 6, 
 
(iv) 
"protected layout-design (topography)" means a layout-design (topography) 
in respect of which the conditions of protection referred to in this Treaty are 
fulfilled,  
      
(v) 
"Contracting Party" means a State, or an Intergovernmental Organization 
meeting the requirements of item (x), party to this Treaty,   
 
(vi) 
"territory of a Contracting Party" means, where the Contracting Party is a 
State, the territory of that State and, where the Contracting Party is an 
Intergovernmental Organization, the territory in which the constituting treaty 
of that Intergovernmental Organization applies, 
 
(vii) 
"Union" means the Union referred to in Article 1,   
 
(viii) 
"Assembly" means the Assembly referred to in Article 9,   
 
(ix) 
"Director General" means the Director General of the World Intellectual 
Property Organization, 
 
(x) 
"Intergovernmental Organization" means an organization constituted by, and 
composed of, States of any region of the world, which has competence in 
respect of matters governed by this Treaty, has its own legislation providing 
for intellectual property protection in respect of layout-designs (topographies) 
and binding on all its member States, and has been duly authorized, in 
accordance with its internal procedures, to sign, ratify, accept, approve or 
accede to this Treaty.   
 
 
75
 
Article 3 
 
The Subject Matter of the Treaty 
(1) 
Obligation to Protect Layout-Designs (Topographies) 
 
(a) 
Each Contracting Party shall have the obligation to secure, throughout its territory, 
intellectual property protection in respect of layout-designs (topographies) in accordance with 
this Treaty. It shall, in particular, secure adequate measures to ensure the prevention of acts 
considered unlawful under Article 6 and appropriate legal remedies where such acts have 
been committed.   
 
(b) 
The right of the holder of the right in respect of an integrated circuit applies whether 
or not the integrated circuit is incorporated in an article.   
 
(c) 
Notwithstanding Article 2(i), any Contracting Party whose law limits the protection 
of layout-designs (topographies) to layout-designs (topographies) of semiconductor integrated 
circuits shall be free to apply that limitation as long as its law contains such limitation.   
 
(2) 
Requirement of Originality 
 
(a) 
The obligation referred to in paragraph (1)(a) shall apply to layout-designs 
(topographies) that are original in the sense that they are the result of their creators' own 
intellectual effort and are not commonplace among creators of layout-designs (topographies) 
and manufacturers of integrated circuits at the time of their creation.   
 
(b) 
A layout-design (topography) that consists of a combination of elements and 
interconnections that are commonplace shall be protected only if the combination, taken as a 
whole, fulfils the conditions referred to in subparagraph (a).   
 
 
Article 4 
 
The Legal Form of the Protection 
 
Each Contracting Party shall be free to implement its obligations under this Treaty through a 
special law on layout-designs (topographies) or its law on copyright, patents, utility models, industrial 
designs, unfair competition or any other law or a combination of any of those laws.   
 
 
Article 5 
 
National Treatment 
(1) 
National Treatment 
 
 
Subject to compliance with its obligation referred to in Article 3(1)(a), each Contracting Party 
shall, in respect of the intellectual property protection of layout-designs (topographies), accord, within 
its territory,  
 
(i) 
to natural persons who are nationals of, or are domiciled in the territory of, any of the 
other Contracting Parties, and 
 
(ii) 
to legal entities which or natural persons who, in the territory of any of the other 
Contracting Parties, have a real and effective establishment for the creation of 
layout-designs (topographies) or the production of integrated circuits,  
 
the same treatment that it accords to its own nationals. 
 
 
 
76
(2) 
Agents, Addresses for Service, Court Proceedings 
 
 
Notwithstanding paragraph (1), any Contracting Party is free not to apply national treatment 
as far as any obligations to appoint an agent or to designate an address for service are concerned or as 
far as the special rules applicable to foreigners in court proceedings are concerned.   
 
(3) 
Application of Paragraphs (1) and (2) to Intergovernmental Organizations 
 
 
Where the Contracting Party is an Intergovernmental Organization, "nationals" in 
paragraph (1) means nationals of any of the States members of that Organization.   
 
 
Article 6 
 
The Scope of the Protection 
(1) 
Acts Requiring the Authorization of the Holder of the Right 
 
(a) 
Any Contracting Party shall consider unlawful the following acts if performed 
without the authorization of the holder of the right:   
 
(i) 
the act of reproducing, whether by incorporation in an integrated circuit or 
otherwise, a protected layout-design (topography) in its entirety or any part 
thereof, except the act of reproducing any part that does not comply with the 
requirement of originality referred to in Article 3(2),  
 
(ii) 
the act of importing, selling or otherwise distributing for commercial 
purposes a protected layout-design (topography) or an integrated circuit in 
which a protected layout-design (topography) is incorporated.   
 
(b) 
Any Contracting Party shall be free to consider unlawful also acts other than those 
specified in subparagraph (a) if performed without the authorization of the holder of the right.   
 (2) 
Acts Not Requiring the Authorization of the Holder of the Right 
 
(a) 
Notwithstanding paragraph (1), no Contracting Party shall consider unlawful the 
performance, without the authorization of the holder of the right, of the act of reproduction 
referred to in paragraph (1)(a)(i) where that act is performed by a third party for private 
purposes or for the sole purpose of evaluation, analysis, research or teaching.   
 
(b) 
Where the third party referred to in subparagraph (a), on the basis of evaluation or 
analysis of the protected layout-design (topography) ("the first layout-design (topography)"), 
creates a layout-design (topography) complying with the requirement of originality referred to 
in Article 3(2) ("the second layout-design (topography)"), that third party may incorporate the 
second layout-design (topography) in an integrated circuit or perform any of the acts referred 
to in paragraph (1) in respect of the second layout-design (topography) without being 
regarded as infringing the rights of the holder of the right in the first layout-design 
(topography).   
 
(c) 
The holder of the right may not exercise his right in respect of an identical original 
layout-design (topography) that was independently created by a third party.   
 
(4) 
Sale and Distribution of Infringing Integrated Circuits Acquired Innocently 
 
 
Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(a)(ii), no Contracting Party shall be obliged to consider 
unlawful the performance of any of the acts referred to in that paragraph in respect of an integrated 
circuit incorporating an unlawfully reproduced layout-design (topography) where the person 
performing or ordering such acts did not know and had no reasonable ground to know, when 
 
 
77
acquiring the said integrated circuit, that it incorporates an unlawfully reproduced layout-design 
(topography). 
 
(5) 
Exhaustion of Rights 
 
 
Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(a)(ii), any Contracting Party may consider lawful the 
performance, without the authorization of the holder of the right, of any of the acts referred to in that 
paragraph where the act is performed in respect of a protected layout-design (topography), or in 
respect of an integrated circuit in which such a layout-design (topography) is incorporated, that has 
been put on the market by, or with the consent of, the holder of the right. 
 
 
Article 7 
 
Exploitation; Registration, Disclosure 
(1) 
Faculty to Require Exploitation 
 
 
Any Contracting Party shall be free not to protect a layout-design (topography) until it has 
been ordinarily commercially exploited, separately or as incorporated in an integrated circuit, 
somewhere in the world.   
 
(2) 
Faculty to Require Registration; Disclosure 
 
(a) 
Any Contracting Party shall be free not to protect a layout-design (topography) until 
the layout-design (topography) has been the subject of an application for registration, filed in 
due form with the competent public authority, or of a registration with that authority; it may 
be required that the application be accompanied by the filing of a copy or drawing of the 
layout-design (topography) and, where the integrated circuit has been commercially 
exploited, of a sample of that integrated circuit, along with information defining the electronic 
function which the integrated circuit is intended to perform; however, the applicant may 
exclude such parts of the copy or drawing that relate to the manner of manufacture of the 
integrated circuit, provided that the parts submitted are sufficient to allow the identification of 
the layout-design (topography).   
 
(b) 
Where the filing of an application for registration according to subparagraph (a) is 
required, the Contracting Party may require that such filing be effected within a certain period 
of time from the date on which the holder of the right first exploits ordinarily commercially 
anywhere in the world the layout-design (topography) of an integrated circuit; such period 
shall not be less than two years counted from the said date. 
 
 
(c) 
Registration under subparagraph (a) may be subject to the payment of a fee. 
 
 
Article 12 
 
Safeguard of Paris and Berne Conventions 
 
This Treaty shall not affect the obligations that any Contracting Party may have under the 
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property or the Berne Convention for the Protection 
of Literary and Artistic Works. 
 
 
 
78
 
Article 16 
 
Entry Into Force of the Treaty 
 
(3) 
Protection of Layout-Designs (Topographies) Existing at Time of Entry Into Force 
 
 
Any Contracting Party shall have the right not to apply this Treaty to any layout-design 
(topography) that exists at the time this Treaty enters into force in respect of that Contracting Party, 
provided that this provision does not affect any protection that such layout-design (topography) may, 
at that time, enjoy in the territory of that Contracting Party by virtue of international obligations other 
than those resulting from this Treaty or the legislation of the said Contracting Party. 
 
 
 
79
 
 
UNDERSTANDING ON RULES AND PROCEDURES 
GOVERNING THE SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
 
 
Members hereby agree as follows: 
 
 
Article 1 
 
Coverage and Application 
 
1. 
The rules and procedures of this Understanding shall apply to disputes brought pursuant to the 
consultation and dispute settlement provisions of the agreements listed in Appendix 1 to this 
Understanding (referred to in this Understanding as the "covered agreements").  The rules and 
procedures of this Understanding shall also apply to consultations and the settlement of disputes 
between Members concerning their rights and obligations under the provisions of the Agreement 
Establishing the World Trade Organization (referred to in this Understanding as the "WTO 
Agreement") and of this Understanding taken in isolation or in combination with any other covered 
agreement. 
 
2. 
The rules and procedures of this Understanding shall apply subject to such special or 
additional rules and procedures on dispute settlement contained in the covered agreements as are 
identified in Appendix 2 to this Understanding.  To the extent that there is a difference between the 
rules and procedures of this Understanding and the special or additional rules and procedures set forth 
in Appendix 2, the special or additional rules and procedures in Appendix 2 shall prevail.  In disputes 
involving rules and procedures under more than one covered agreement, if there is a conflict between 
special or additional rules and procedures of such agreements under review, and where the parties to 
the dispute cannot agree on rules and procedures within 20 days of the establishment of the panel, the 
Chairman of the Dispute Settlement Body provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 2 (referred to in this 
Understanding as the "DSB"), in consultation with the parties to the dispute, shall determine the rules 
and procedures to be followed within 10 days after a request by either Member.  The Chairman shall 
be guided by the principle that special or additional rules and procedures should be used where 
possible, and the rules and procedures set out in this Understanding should be used to the extent 
necessary to avoid conflict. 
 
 
Article 2 
 
Administration 
 
1. 
The Dispute Settlement Body is hereby established to administer these rules and procedures 
and, except as otherwise provided in a covered agreement, the consultation and dispute settlement 
provisions of the covered agreements.  Accordingly, the DSB shall have the authority to establish 
panels, adopt panel and Appellate Body reports, maintain surveillance of implementation of rulings 
and recommendations, and authorize suspension of concessions and other obligations under the 
covered agreements.  With respect to disputes arising under a covered agreement which is a 
Plurilateral Trade Agreement, the term "Member" as used herein shall refer only to those Members 
that are parties to the relevant Plurilateral Trade Agreement.  Where the DSB administers the dispute 
settlement provisions of a Plurilateral Trade Agreement, only those Members that are parties to that 
Agreement may participate in decisions or actions taken by the DSB with respect to that dispute. 
 
2. 
The DSB shall inform the relevant WTO Councils and Committees of any developments in 
disputes related to provisions of the respective covered agreements.   
 
 
 
80
3. 
The DSB shall meet as often as necessary to carry out its functions within the time-frames 
provided in this Understanding. 
 
4. 
Where the rules and procedures of this Understanding provide for the DSB to take a decision, 
it shall do so by consensus.15 
 
 
Article 3 
 
General Provisions  
 
1. 
Members affirm their adherence to the principles for the management of disputes heretofore 
applied under Articles XXII and XXIII of GATT 1947, and the rules and procedures as further 
elaborated and modified herein. 
 
2. 
The dispute settlement system of the WTO is a central element in providing security and 
predictability to the multilateral trading system.  The Members recognize that it serves to preserve the 
rights and obligations of Members under the covered agreements, and to clarify the existing 
provisions of those agreements in accordance with customary rules of interpretation of public 
international law. Recommendations and rulings of the DSB cannot add to or diminish the rights and 
obligations provided in the covered agreements. 
 
3. 
The prompt settlement of situations in which a Member considers that any benefits accruing 
to it directly or indirectly under the covered agreements are being impaired by measures taken by 
another Member is essential to the effective functioning of the WTO and the maintenance of a proper 
balance between the rights and obligations of Members.   
 
4. 
Recommendations or rulings made by the DSB shall be aimed at achieving a satisfactory 
settlement of the matter in accordance with the  rights and obligations under this Understanding and 
under the covered agreements.  
 
5. 
All solutions to matters formally raised under  the consultation and dispute settlement 
provisions of the covered agreements, including arbitration awards, shall be consistent with those 
agreements and shall not nullify or impair benefits accruing to any Member under those agreements, 
nor impede the attainment of any objective of those agreements.  
 
6. 
Mutually agreed solutions to matters formally raised under the consultation and dispute 
settlement provisions of the covered agreements shall be notified to the DSB and the relevant 
Councils and Committees, where any Member may raise any point relating thereto. 
 
7. 
Before bringing a case, a Member shall exercise its judgement as to whether action under 
these procedures would be fruitful.  The aim of the  dispute settlement mechanism is to secure a 
positive solution to a dispute.  A solution mutually acceptable to the parties to a dispute and consistent 
with the covered agreements is clearly to be preferred. In the absence of a mutually agreed solution, 
the first objective of the dispute settlement mechanism is usually to secure the withdrawal of the 
measures concerned if these are found to be inconsistent with the provisions of any of the covered 
agreements.  The provision of compensation should be resorted to only if the immediate withdrawal 
of the measure is impracticable and as a temporary measure pending the withdrawal of the measure 
which is  inconsistent with a covered agreement.  The last resort which this Understanding provides to 
the Member invoking the dispute settlement procedures is the possibility of suspending the 
application of concessions or other obligations under the covered agreements on a discriminatory 
basis vis-à-vis the other Member, subject to authorization by the DSB of such measures.  
 
                                                      
15 The DSB shall be deemed to have decided by consensus on a matter submitted for its consideration, 
if no Member, present at the meeting of the DSB when the decision is taken, formally objects to the proposed 
decision. 
 
 
81
8. 
In cases where there is an infringement of the obligations assumed under a covered 
agreement, the action is considered prima facie to constitute a case of nullification or impairment.  
This means that there is normally a presumption that a breach of the rules has an adverse impact on 
other Members parties to that covered agreement, and in such cases, it shall be up to the Member 
against whom the complaint has been brought to rebut the charge. 
 
9. 
The provisions of this Understanding are without prejudice to the rights of Members to seek 
authoritative interpretation of provisions of a covered agreement through decision-making under the 
WTO Agreement or a covered agreement which is a Plurilateral Trade Agreement. 
 
10. 
It is understood that requests for conciliation and the use of the dispute settlement procedures 
should not be intended or considered as contentious acts and that, if a dispute arises, all Members will 
engage in these procedures in good faith in an effort to resolve the dispute.  It is also understood that 
complaints and counter-complaints in regard to distinct matters should not be linked.  
 
11. 
This Understanding shall be applied only with respect to new requests for consultations under 
the consultation provisions of the covered agreements made on or after the date of entry into force of 
the WTO Agreement.  With respect to disputes for which the request for consultations was made 
under GATT 1947 or under any other predecessor agreement to the covered agreements before the 
date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement, the relevant dispute settlement rules and procedures 
in effect immediately prior to the date of entry into force of the WTO Agreement shall continue to 
apply.16 
 
12. 
Notwithstanding paragraph 11, if a complaint based on any of the covered agreements is 
brought by a developing country Member against a developed country Member, the complaining 
party shall have the right to invoke, as an alternative to the provisions contained in Articles 4, 5, 6 and 
12 of this Understanding, the corresponding provisions of the Decision of 5 April 1966 (BISD 
14S/18), except that where the Panel considers that the time-frame provided for in paragraph 7 of that 
Decision is insufficient to provide its report and with the agreement of the complaining party, that 
time-frame may be extended.  To the extent that there is a difference between the rules and procedures 
of Articles 4, 5, 6 and 12  and the corresponding rules and procedures of the Decision, the latter shall 
prevail. 
 
 
Article 4 
 
Consultations 
 
1. 
Members affirm their resolve to strengthen and improve the effectiveness of the consultation  
procedures employed by Members. 
 
2. 
Each Member undertakes to accord sympathetic consideration to and afford adequate 
opportunity for consultation regarding any representations made by another Member concerning 
measures affecting the operation of any covered agreement taken within the territory of the former.17 
 
3. 
If a request for consultations is made pursuant to a covered agreement, the Member to which 
the request is made shall, unless otherwise mutually agreed, reply to the request within 10 days after 
the date of its receipt and shall enter into consultations in good faith within a period of no more than 
30 days after the date of receipt of the request, with a view to reaching a mutually satisfactory 
solution.  If the Member does not respond within 10 days after the date of receipt of the request, or 
does not enter into consultations within a period of no more than 30 days, or a period otherwise 
                                                      
16 This paragraph shall also be applied to disputes on which panel reports have not been adopted or 
fully implemented. 
17 Where the provisions of any other covered agreement concerning measures taken by regional or local 
governments or authorities within the territory of a Member contain provisions different from the provisions of 
this paragraph, the provisions of such other covered agreement shall prevail. 
 
 
82
mutually agreed, after the date of receipt of the request, then the Member that requested the holding of 
consultations may proceed directly to request the establishment of a panel. 
 
4. 
All such requests for consultations shall be notified to the DSB and the relevant Councils and 
Committees by the Member which requests consultations.  Any request for consultations shall be 
submitted in writing and shall give the reasons for the request, including identification of the 
measures at issue and an indication of the legal basis for the complaint. 
 
5. 
In the course of consultations in accordance with the provisions of a covered agreement, 
before resorting to further action under this Understanding, Members should attempt to obtain 
satisfactory adjustment of the matter. 
 
6. 
Consultations shall be confidential, and without prejudice to the rights of any Member in any 
further proceedings. 
 
7. 
If the consultations fail to settle a dispute within 60 days after the date of receipt of the 
request for consultations, the complaining party may request the establishment of a panel.  The 
complaining party may request a panel during the 60-day period if the consulting parties jointly 
consider that consultations have failed to settle the dispute.   
 
8. 
In cases of urgency, including those which concern perishable goods, Members shall enter 
into consultations within a period of no more than 10 days after the date of receipt of the request.  If 
the consultations have failed to settle the dispute within a period of 20 days after the date of receipt of 
the request, the complaining party may request the establishment of a panel.  
 
9. 
In cases of urgency, including those which concern perishable goods, the parties to the 
dispute, panels and the Appellate Body shall make every effort to accelerate the proceedings to the 
greatest extent possible. 
 
10. 
During consultations Members should give special attention to the particular problems and 
interests of developing country Members.  
 
11. 
Whenever a Member other than the consulting Members considers that it has a substantial 
trade interest in consultations being held pursuant to paragraph 1 of Article XXII of GATT 1994, 
paragraph 1 of Article XXII of GATS, or the corresponding provisions in other covered agreements18, 
such Member may notify the consulting Members and the DSB, within 10 days after the date of the 
circulation of the request for consultations under said Article, of its desire to be joined in the 
consultations.  Such Member shall be joined in the consultations, provided that the Member to which 
the request for consultations was addressed agrees that the claim of substantial interest is well-
founded.  In that event they shall so inform the DSB.  If the request to be joined in the consultations is 
not accepted, the applicant Member shall be free to request consultations under paragraph 1 of Article 
XXII or paragraph 1 of Article XXIII of GATT 1994, paragraph 1 of Article XXII or paragraph 1 of 
Article XXIII of GATS, or the corresponding provisions in other covered agreements. 
 
                                                      
18 The corresponding consultation provisions in the covered agreements are listed hereunder:  
Agreement on Agriculture, Article 19;  Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, 
paragraph 1 of Article 11;  Agreement on Textiles and Clothing, paragraph 4 of Article 8;  Agreement on 
Technical Barriers to Trade, paragraph 1 of Article 14;  Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures, 
Article 8;  Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of GATT 1994, paragraph 2 of Article 17;  Agreement 
on Implementation of Article VII of GATT 1994, paragraph 2 of Article 19;  Agreement on Preshipment 
Inspection, Article 7;  Agreement on Rules of Origin, Article 7;  Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures, 
Article 6;  Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, Article 30;  Agreement on Safeguards, Article 
14;  Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, Article 64.1; and any corresponding 
consultation provisions in Plurilateral Trade Agreements as determined by the competent bodies of each 
Agreement and as notified to the DSB. 
 
 
83
 
Article 5 
 
Good Offices, Conciliation and Mediation 
 
1.  
Good offices, conciliation and mediation are procedures that are undertaken voluntarily if the 
parties to the dispute so agree. 
 
2.  
Proceedings involving good offices, conciliation and mediation, and in particular positions 
taken by the parties to the dispute during these proceedings, shall be confidential, and without 
prejudice to the rights of either party in any further proceedings under these procedures. 
 
3.  
Good offices, conciliation or mediation may be requested at any time by any party to a 
dispute. They may begin at any time and be terminated at any time.  Once procedures for good 
offices, conciliation or mediation are terminated, a complaining party may then proceed with a request 
for the establishment of a panel. 
 
4.  
When good offices, conciliation or mediation are entered into within 60 days after the date of 
receipt of a request for consultations, the complaining party must allow a period of 60 days after the 
date of receipt of the request for consultations before requesting the establishment of a panel.  The 
complaining party may request the establishment of a panel during the 60-day period if the parties to 
the dispute jointly consider that the good offices, conciliation or mediation process has failed to settle 
the dispute.  
 
5.  
If the parties to a dispute agree, procedures for good offices, conciliation or mediation may 
continue while the panel process proceeds.  
 
6.   
The Director-General may, acting in an ex officio capacity, offer good offices, conciliation or 
mediation with the view to assisting Members to settle a dispute.  
 
 
Article 6 
 
Establishment of Panels 
 
1.   
If the complaining party so requests, a panel shall be established at the latest at the DSB 
meeting following that at which the request first appears as an item on the DSB's agenda, unless at 
that meeting the DSB decides by consensus not to establish a panel.19 
 
2.   
The request for the establishment of a panel shall be made in writing.  It shall indicate 
whether consultations were held, identify the specific measures at issue and provide a brief summary 
of the legal basis of the complaint sufficient to present the problem clearly.  In case the applicant 
requests the establishment of a panel with other than standard terms of reference, the written request 
shall include the proposed text of special terms of reference. 
 
 
Article 7 
 
Terms of Reference of Panels 
 
1.   
Panels shall have the following terms of reference unless the parties to the dispute agree 
otherwise within 20 days from the establishment of the panel: 
 
                                                      
19 If the complaining party so requests, a meeting of the DSB shall be convened for this purpose within 
15 days of the request, provided that at least 10 days' advance notice of the meeting is given. 
 
 
84
 
"To examine, in the light of the relevant provisions in (name of the covered 
agreement(s) cited by the parties to the dispute), the matter referred to the DSB by (name of 
party) in document ... and to make such findings as will assist the DSB in making the 
recommendations or in giving the rulings provided for in that/those agreement(s)." 
 
2.   
Panels shall address the relevant provisions in any covered agreement or agreements cited by 
the parties to the dispute. 
 
3.   
In establishing a panel, the DSB may authorize its Chairman to draw up the terms of reference 
of the panel in consultation with the parties to the dispute, subject to the provisions of paragraph 1. 
The terms of reference thus drawn up shall be circulated to all Members.  If other than standard terms 
of reference are agreed upon, any Member may raise any point relating thereto in the DSB.  
 
 
Article 8 
 
Composition of Panels 
 
1.   
Panels shall be composed of well-qualified governmental and/or non-governmental 
individuals, including persons who have served on or presented a case to a panel, served as a 
representative of a Member or of a contracting party to GATT 1947 or as a representative to the 
Council or Committee of any covered agreement or its predecessor agreement, or in the Secretariat, 
taught or published on international trade law or policy, or served as a senior trade policy official of a 
Member. 
 
2.   
Panel members should be selected with a view to ensuring the independence of the members, 
a sufficiently diverse background and a wide spectrum of experience. 
 
3.   
Citizens of Members whose governments20 are parties to the dispute or third parties as defined 
in paragraph 2 of Article 10 shall not serve on a panel concerned with that dispute, unless the parties 
to the dispute agree otherwise. 
 
4.   
To assist in the selection of panelists, the Secretariat shall maintain an indicative list of 
governmental and non-governmental individuals possessing the qualifications outlined in paragraph 1, 
from which panelists may be drawn as appropriate.  That list shall  include the roster of non-
governmental panelists established on 30 November 1984 (BISD 31S/9), and other rosters and 
indicative lists established under any of the covered agreements, and shall retain the names of persons 
on those rosters and indicative lists at the time of entry into force of the WTO Agreement.  Members 
may periodically suggest names of governmental and non-governmental individuals for inclusion on 
the indicative list, providing relevant information on their knowledge of international trade and of the 
sectors or subject matter of the covered agreements, and those names shall be added to the list upon 
approval by the DSB.  For each of the individuals on the list, the list shall indicate specific areas of 
experience or expertise of the individuals in the sectors or subject matter of the covered agreements. 
 
5.   
Panels shall be composed of three panelists unless the parties to the dispute agree, within 
10 days from the establishment of the panel, to a panel composed of five panelists.  Members shall be 
informed promptly of the composition of the panel. 
 
6.   
The Secretariat shall propose nominations for the panel to the parties to the dispute.  The 
parties to the dispute shall not oppose nominations except for compelling reasons. 
 
7.   
If there is no agreement on the panelists within 20 days after the date of the establishment of a 
panel, at the request of either party, the Director-General, in consultation with the Chairman of the 
DSB and the Chairman of the relevant Council or Committee, shall determine the composition of the 
                                                      
20 In the case where customs unions or common markets are parties to a dispute, this provision applies 
to citizens of all member countries of the customs unions or common markets. 
 
 
85
panel by appointing the panelists whom the Director-General considers most appropriate in 
accordance with any relevant special or additional rules or procedures of the covered agreement or 
covered agreements which are at issue in the dispute, after consulting with the parties to the dispute.  
The Chairman of the DSB shall inform the Members of the composition of the panel thus formed no 
later than 10 days after the date the Chairman receives such a request. 
 
8.   
Members shall undertake, as a general rule, to permit their officials to serve as panelists. 
 
9.   
Panelists shall serve in their individual capacities and not as government representatives, nor 
as representatives of any organization.  Members shall therefore not give them instructions nor seek to 
influence them as individuals with regard to matters before a panel. 
 
10. 
When a dispute is between a developing country Member and a developed country Member 
the panel shall, if the developing country Member so requests, include at least one panelist from a 
developing country Member. 
 
11. 
Panelists'  expenses, including travel and subsistence allowance, shall be met from the WTO 
budget in accordance with criteria to be adopted by the General Council, based on recommendations 
of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration. 
 
 
Article 9 
 
Procedures for Multiple Complainants 
 
1.   
Where more than one Member requests the establishment of a panel related to the same 
matter, a single panel may be established to examine these complaints taking into account the rights of 
all Members concerned.  A single panel should be established to examine such complaints whenever 
feasible. 
 
2.   
The single panel shall organize its examination and present its findings to the DSB in such a 
manner that the rights which the parties to the dispute would have enjoyed had separate panels 
examined the complaints are in no way impaired.  If one of the parties to the dispute so requests, the 
panel shall submit separate reports on the dispute concerned.  The written submissions by each of the 
complainants shall be made available to the other complainants, and each complainant shall have the 
right to be present when any one of the other complainants presents its views to the panel.  
 
3.   
If more than one panel is established to examine the complaints related to the same matter, to 
the greatest extent possible the same persons shall serve as panelists on each of the separate panels 
and the timetable for the panel process in such disputes shall be harmonized. 
 
 
Article 10 
 
Third Parties 
 
1. 
The interests of the parties to a dispute and those of other Members under a covered 
agreement at issue in the dispute shall be fully taken into account during the panel process. 
 
2.  
Any Member having a substantial interest in a matter before a panel and having notified its 
interest to the DSB (referred to in this Understanding as a "third party") shall have an opportunity to 
be heard by the panel and to make written submissions to the panel.  These submissions shall also be 
given to the parties to the dispute and shall be reflected in the panel report.  
 
3. 
Third parties shall receive the submissions of the parties to the dispute to the first meeting of 
the panel.  
 
 
 
86
4. 
If a third party considers that a measure already the subject of a panel proceeding nullifies or 
impairs benefits accruing to it under any covered agreement, that Member may have recourse to 
normal dispute settlement procedures under this Understanding.  Such a dispute shall be referred to 
the original panel wherever possible. 
 
 
Article 11 
 
Function of Panels 
 
 
The function of panels is to assist the DSB in discharging its responsibilities under this 
Understanding and the covered agreements.  Accordingly, a panel should make an objective 
assessment of the matter before it, including an objective assessment of the facts of the case and the 
applicability of and conformity with the relevant covered agreements, and make such other findings as 
will assist the DSB in making the recommendations or in giving the rulings provided for in the 
covered agreements.  Panels should consult regularly with the parties to the dispute and give them 
adequate opportunity to develop a mutually satisfactory solution.  
 
 
Article 12 
 
Panel Procedures 
 
1. 
Panels shall follow the Working Procedures in Appendix 3 unless the panel decides otherwise 
after consulting the parties to the dispute.   
 
2.  
Panel procedures should provide sufficient flexibility so as to ensure high-quality panel 
reports, while not unduly delaying the panel process.  
 
3. 
After consulting the parties to the dispute, the panelists shall, as soon as practicable and 
whenever possible within one week after the composition and terms of reference of the panel have 
been agreed upon, fix the timetable for the panel process, taking into account the provisions of 
paragraph 9 of Article 4, if relevant. 
 
4. 
In determining the timetable for the panel process, the panel shall provide sufficient time for 
the parties to the dispute to prepare their submissions.  
 
5. 
Panels should set precise deadlines for written submissions by the parties and the parties 
should respect those deadlines. 
 
6. 
Each party to the dispute shall deposit its written submissions with the Secretariat for 
immediate transmission to the panel and to the other party or parties to the dispute.  The complaining 
party shall submit its first submission in advance of the responding party's first submission unless the 
panel decides, in fixing the timetable referred to in paragraph 3 and after consultations with the parties 
to the dispute, that the parties should submit their first submissions simultaneously.  When there are 
sequential arrangements for the deposit of first submissions, the panel shall establish a firm time-
period for receipt of the responding party's submission.  Any subsequent written submissions shall be 
submitted simultaneously.  
 
7. 
Where the parties to the dispute have failed to develop a mutually satisfactory solution, the 
panel shall submit its findings in the form of a written report to the DSB.  In such cases, the report of 
a panel shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of relevant provisions and the basic rationale 
behind any findings and recommendations that it makes.  Where a settlement of the matter among the 
parties to the dispute has been found, the report of the panel shall be confined to a brief description of 
the case and to reporting that a solution has been reached.  
 
 
 
87
8. 
In order to make the procedures more efficient, the period in which the panel shall conduct its 
examination, from the date that the composition and terms of reference of the panel have been agreed 
upon until the date the final report is issued to the parties to the dispute, shall, as a general rule, not 
exceed six months.  In cases of urgency, including those relating to perishable goods, the panel shall 
aim to issue its report to the parties to the dispute within three months.  
 
9. 
When the panel considers that it cannot issue its report within six months, or within three 
months in cases of urgency, it shall inform the DSB in writing of the reasons for the delay together 
with an estimate of the period within which it will issue its report.  In no case should the period from 
the establishment of the panel to the circulation of the report to the Members exceed nine months. 
 
10. 
In the context of consultations involving a measure taken by a developing country Member, 
the parties may agree to extend the periods established in paragraphs 7 and 8 of Article 4.  If, after the 
relevant period has elapsed, the consulting parties cannot agree that the consultations have concluded, 
the Chairman of the DSB shall decide, after consultation with the parties, whether to extend the 
relevant period and, if so, for how long.  In addition, in examining a complaint against a developing 
country Member, the panel shall accord sufficient time for the developing country Member to prepare 
and present its argumentation. The provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 20 and paragraph 4 of Article 
21 are not affected by any action pursuant to this paragraph.  
 
11. 
Where one or more of the parties is a developing country Member, the panel's report shall 
explicitly indicate the form in which account has been taken of relevant provisions on differential and 
more-favourable treatment for developing country Members that form part of the covered agreements 
which have been raised by the developing country Member in the course of the dispute settlement 
procedures. 
 
12. 
The panel may suspend its work at any time at the request of the complaining party for a 
period not to exceed 12 months.  In the event of such a suspension, the time-frames set out in 
paragraphs 8 and 9 of this Article,  paragraph 1 of Article 20, and paragraph 4 of Article 21 shall be 
extended by the amount of time that the work was suspended.  If the work of the panel has been 
suspended for more than 12 months, the authority for establishment of the panel shall lapse. 
 
 
Article 13 
 
Right to Seek Information 
 
1. 
Each panel shall have the right to seek information and technical advice from any individual 
or body which it deems appropriate. However, before a panel seeks such information or advice from 
any individual or body within the jurisdiction of a Member it shall inform the authorities of that 
Member.  A Member should respond promptly and fully to any request by a panel for such 
information as the panel considers necessary and appropriate.  Confidential information which is 
provided shall not be revealed without formal authorization from the individual, body, or authorities 
of the Member  providing the information.  
 
2. 
Panels may seek information from any relevant source and may consult experts to obtain their 
opinion on certain aspects of the matter.  With respect to a factual issue concerning a scientific or 
other technical matter raised by a party to a dispute, a panel may request an advisory report in writing 
from an expert review group.  Rules for the establishment of such a group and its procedures are set 
forth in Appendix 4. 
 
 
 
88
 
Article 14 
 
Confidentiality 
 
1. 
Panel deliberations shall be confidential. 
 
2. 
The reports of panels shall be drafted without the presence of the parties to the dispute in the 
light of the information provided and the statements made. 
 
3. 
Opinions expressed in the panel report by individual panelists shall be anonymous. 
 
 
Article 15 
 
Interim Review Stage 
 
1. 
Following the consideration of rebuttal submissions and oral arguments, the panel shall issue 
the descriptive (factual and argument) sections of its draft report to the parties to the dispute.  Within a 
period of time set by the panel, the parties shall submit their comments in writing.  
 
2. 
Following the expiration of the set period of time for receipt of comments from the parties to 
the dispute, the panel shall issue an interim report to the parties, including both the descriptive 
sections and the panel's findings and conclusions.  Within a period of time set by the panel, a party 
may submit a written request for the panel to review precise aspects of the interim report prior to 
circulation of the final report to the Members.  At the request of a party, the panel shall hold a further 
meeting with the parties on the issues identified in the written comments.  If no comments are 
received from any party within the comment period, the interim report shall be considered the final 
panel report and circulated promptly to the Members.  
 
3. 
The findings of the final panel report shall include a discussion of the arguments made at the 
interim review stage.  The interim review stage shall be conducted within the time-period set out in 
paragraph 8 of Article 12. 
 
 
Article 16 
 
Adoption of Panel Reports 
 
1. 
In order to provide sufficient time for the Members to consider panel reports, the reports shall 
not be considered for adoption by the DSB until 20 days after the date they have been circulated to the 
Members.  
 
2. 
Members having objections to a panel report shall give written reasons to explain their 
objections for circulation at least 10 days prior to the DSB meeting at which the panel report will be 
considered.  
 
3. 
The parties to a dispute shall have the right to participate fully in the consideration of the 
panel report by the DSB, and their views shall be fully recorded.  
 
4. 
Within 60 days after the date of circulation of a panel report to the Members, the report shall 
be adopted at a DSB meeting21 unless a party to the dispute formally notifies the DSB of its decision 
to appeal or the DSB decides by consensus not to adopt the report.  If a party has notified its decision 
to appeal, the report by the panel shall not be considered for adoption by the DSB until after 
                                                      
21 If a meeting of the DSB is not scheduled within this period at a time that enables the requirements of 
paragraphs 1 and 4 of Article 16 to be met, a meeting of the DSB shall be held for this purpose. 
 
 
89
completion of the appeal.  This adoption procedure is without prejudice to the right of Members to 
express their views on a panel report. 
 
 
Article 17 
 
Appellate Review 
 
Standing Appellate Body 
 
1. 
A standing Appellate Body shall be established by the DSB. The Appellate Body shall hear 
appeals from panel cases.  It shall be composed of seven persons, three of whom shall serve on any 
one case.  Persons serving on the Appellate Body shall serve in rotation.  Such rotation shall be 
determined in the working procedures of the Appellate Body. 
 
2. 
The DSB shall appoint persons to serve on the Appellate Body for a four-year term, and each 
person may be reappointed once.  However, the terms of three of the seven persons appointed 
immediately after the entry into force of the WTO Agreement shall expire at the end of two years, to 
be determined by lot.  Vacancies shall be filled as they arise.  A person appointed to replace a person 
whose term of office has not expired shall hold office for the remainder of the predecessor's term. 
 
3.  
The Appellate Body shall comprise persons of recognized authority, with demonstrated 
expertise in law, international trade and the subject matter of the covered agreements generally.  They 
shall be unaffiliated with any government.  The Appellate Body membership shall be broadly 
representative of membership in the WTO.  All persons serving on the Appellate Body shall be 
available at all times and on short notice, and shall stay abreast of dispute settlement activities and 
other relevant activities of the WTO.  They shall not participate in the consideration of any disputes 
that would create a direct or indirect conflict of interest.  
 
4. 
Only parties to the dispute, not third parties, may appeal a panel report.  Third parties which 
have notified the DSB of a substantial interest in the matter pursuant to paragraph 2 of Article 10 may 
make written submissions to, and be given an opportunity to be heard by, the Appellate Body. 
 
 
5. 
As a general rule, the proceedings shall not exceed 60 days from the date a party to the 
dispute formally notifies its decision to appeal to the date the Appellate Body circulates its report.  In 
fixing its timetable the Appellate Body shall take into account the provisions of paragraph 9 of Article 
4, if relevant.  When the Appellate Body considers that it cannot provide its report within 60 days, it 
shall inform the DSB in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period 
within which it will submit its report.  In no case shall the proceedings exceed 90 days. 
 
6. 
An appeal shall be limited to issues of law covered in the panel report and legal 
interpretations developed by the panel.  
 
7. 
The Appellate Body shall be provided with appropriate administrative and legal support as it 
requires.  
 
8. 
The expenses of persons serving on the Appellate Body, including travel and subsistence 
allowance, shall be met from the WTO budget in accordance with criteria to be adopted by the 
General Council, based on recommendations of the Committee on Budget, Finance and 
Administration. 
 
Procedures for Appellate Review 
 
9. 
Working procedures shall be drawn up by the Appellate Body in consultation with the 
Chairman of the DSB and the Director-General, and communicated to the Members for their 
information.   
 
 
 
 
90
10. 
The proceedings of the Appellate Body shall be confidential.  The reports of the Appellate 
Body shall be drafted without the presence of the parties to the dispute and in the light of the 
information provided and the statements made. 
 
11. 
Opinions expressed in the Appellate Body report by individuals serving on the Appellate 
Body shall be anonymous. 
 
12. 
The Appellate Body shall address each of the issues raised in accordance with paragraph 6 
during the appellate proceeding.  
 
13. 
The Appellate Body may uphold, modify or reverse the legal findings and conclusions of the 
panel. 
 
Adoption of Appellate Body Reports  
 
14. 
An Appellate Body report shall be adopted by the DSB and unconditionally accepted by the 
parties to the dispute unless the DSB decides by consensus not to adopt the Appellate Body report 
within 30 days following its circulation to the Members.22 This adoption procedure is without 
prejudice to the right of Members to express their views on an Appellate Body report.  
 
 
Article 18 
 
Communications with the Panel or Appellate Body 
 
1. 
There shall be no ex parte communications with the panel or Appellate Body  concerning 
matters under consideration by the panel or Appellate Body. 
 
2. 
Written submissions to the panel or the Appellate Body shall be treated as confidential, but 
shall be made available to the parties to the dispute.  Nothing in this Understanding shall preclude a 
party to a dispute from disclosing statements of its own positions to the public.  Members shall treat as 
confidential information submitted by another Member to the panel or the Appellate Body which that 
Member has designated as confidential.  A party to a dispute shall also, upon request of a Member, 
provide a non-confidential summary of the information contained in its written submissions that could 
be disclosed to the public. 
 
Article 19 
 
Panel and Appellate Body Recommendations 
 
1. 
Where a panel or the Appellate Body concludes that a measure is inconsistent with a covered 
agreement, it shall recommend that the Member concerned23 bring the measure into conformity with 
that agreement.24  In addition to its recommendations, the panel or Appellate Body may suggest ways 
in which the Member concerned could implement the recommendations.  
 
2. 
In accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 3, in their findings and recommendations, the panel 
and Appellate Body cannot add to or diminish the rights and obligations provided in the covered 
agreements. 
 
 
                                                      
22 If a meeting of the DSB is not scheduled during this period, such a meeting of the DSB shall be held 
for this purpose. 
23 The "Member concerned" is the party to the dispute to which the panel or Appellate Body 
recommendations are directed. 
24 With respect to recommendations in cases not involving a violation of GATT 1994 or any other 
covered agreement, see Article 26. 
 
 
91
Article 20 
 
Time-frame for DSB Decisions 
 
 
Unless otherwise agreed to by the parties to the dispute, the period from the date of 
establishment of the panel by the DSB until the date the DSB considers the panel or appellate report 
for adoption shall as a general rule not exceed nine months where the panel report is not appealed or 
12 months where the report is appealed.  Where either the panel or the Appellate Body has acted, 
pursuant to paragraph 9 of Article 12 or paragraph 5 of Article 17, to extend the time for providing its 
report, the additional time taken shall be added to the above periods.  
 
 
Article 21 
 
Surveillance of Implementation of Recommendations and Rulings 
 
1. 
Prompt compliance with recommendations or rulings of the DSB is essential in order to 
ensure effective resolution of disputes to the benefit of all Members. 
 
2. 
Particular attention should be paid to matters affecting the interests of developing country 
Members with respect to measures which have been subject to dispute settlement. 
 
3. 
At a DSB meeting held within 30 days25 after the date of adoption of the panel or Appellate 
Body report, the Member concerned shall inform the DSB of its intentions in respect of 
implementation of the recommendations and rulings of the DSB.  If it is impracticable to comply 
immediately with the recommendations and rulings, the Member concerned shall have a reasonable 
period of time in which to do so.  The reasonable period of time shall be: 
 
(a) 
the period of time proposed by the Member concerned, provided that such period is 
approved by the DSB;  or, in the absence of such approval,  
 
(b)  
a period of time mutually agreed by the parties to the dispute within 45 days after the 
date of adoption of the recommendations and rulings; or, in the absence of such 
agreement,  
 
(c)  
a period of time determined through binding arbitration within 90 days after the date 
of adoption of the recommendations and rulings.26  In such arbitration, a guideline for 
the arbitrator27 should be that the reasonable period of time to implement panel or 
Appellate Body recommendations should not exceed 15 months from the date of 
adoption of a panel or Appellate Body report.  However, that time may be shorter or 
longer, depending upon the particular circumstances. 
 
4. 
Except where the panel or the Appellate Body has extended, pursuant to paragraph 9 of 
Article 12 or paragraph 5 of Article 17, the time of providing its report, the period from the date of 
establishment of the panel by the DSB until the date of determination of the reasonable period of time 
shall not exceed 15 months unless the parties to the dispute agree otherwise.  Where either the panel 
or the Appellate Body has acted to extend the time of providing its report, the additional time taken 
shall be added to the 15-month period; provided that unless the parties to the dispute agree that there 
are exceptional circumstances, the total time shall not exceed 18 months.  
 
                                                      
25 If a meeting of the DSB is not scheduled during this period, such a meeting of the DSB shall be held 
for this purpose. 
26 If the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator within ten days after referring the matter to arbitration, the 
arbitrator shall be appointed by the Director-General within ten days, after consulting the parties. 
27 The expression "arbitrator" shall be interpreted as referring either to an individual or a group. 
 
 
92
5. 
Where there is disagreement as to the existence or consistency with a covered agreement of 
measures taken to comply with the recommendations and rulings such dispute shall be decided 
through recourse to these dispute settlement procedures, including wherever possible resort to the 
original panel. The panel shall circulate its report within 90 days after the date of referral of the matter 
to it.  When the panel considers that it cannot provide its report within this time frame, it shall inform 
the DSB in writing of the reasons for the delay together with an estimate of the period within which it 
will submit its report. 
 
6. 
The DSB shall keep under surveillance the implementation of adopted recommendations or 
rulings.  The issue of implementation of the recommendations or rulings may be raised at the DSB by 
any Member at any time following their adoption.  Unless the DSB decides otherwise, the issue of 
implementation of the recommendations or rulings shall be placed on the agenda of the DSB meeting 
after six months following the date of establishment of the reasonable period of time pursuant to 
paragraph 3 and shall remain on the DSB's agenda until the issue is resolved.  At least 10 days prior to 
each such DSB meeting, the Member concerned shall provide the DSB with a status report in writing 
of its progress in the implementation of the recommendations or rulings. 
 
7. 
If the matter is one which has been raised by a developing country Member, the DSB shall 
consider what further action it might take which would be appropriate to the circumstances. 
 
8. 
If the case is one brought by a developing country Member, in considering what appropriate 
action might be taken, the DSB shall take into account not only the trade coverage of measures 
complained of, but also their impact on the economy of developing country Members concerned. 
 
 
Article 22 
 
Compensation and the Suspension of Concessions 
 
1. 
Compensation and the suspension of concessions or other obligations are temporary measures 
available in the event that the recommendations and rulings are not implemented within a reasonable 
period of time.  However, neither compensation nor the suspension of concessions or other 
obligations is preferred to full implementation of a recommendation to bring a measure into 
conformity with the covered agreements.  Compensation is voluntary and, if granted, shall be 
consistent with the covered agreements.  
 
2. 
If the Member concerned fails to bring the measure found to be inconsistent with a covered 
agreement into compliance therewith or otherwise comply with the recommendations and rulings 
within the reasonable period of time determined pursuant to paragraph 3 of Article 21, such Member 
shall, if so requested, and no later than the expiry of the reasonable period of time, enter into 
negotiations with any party having invoked the dispute settlement procedures, with a view to 
developing mutually acceptable compensation.  If no satisfactory compensation has been agreed 
within 20 days after the date of expiry of the reasonable period of time, any party having invoked the 
dispute settlement procedures may request authorization from the DSB to suspend the application to 
the Member concerned of concessions or other obligations under the covered agreements. 
 
3. 
In considering what concessions or other obligations to suspend, the complaining party shall 
apply the following principles and procedures: 
 
(a) 
the general principle is that the complaining party should first seek to suspend 
concessions or other obligations with respect to the same sector(s) as that in which 
the panel or Appellate Body has found a violation or other nullification or 
impairment; 
 
(b) 
if that party considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend concessions or 
other obligations  with respect to the same sector(s), it may seek to suspend 
concessions or other obligations in other sectors under the same agreement; 
 
 
93
 
(c) 
if that party considers that it is not practicable or effective to suspend concessions or 
other obligations with respect to other sectors under the same agreement, and that the 
circumstances are serious enough, it may seek to suspend concessions or other 
obligations under another covered agreement; 
 
(d) 
in applying the above principles, that party shall take into account: 
 
(i) 
the trade in the sector or under the agreement under which the panel or 
Appellate Body has found a violation or other nullification or impairment, 
and the importance of such trade to that party; 
 
(ii) 
the broader economic elements related to the nullification or impairment and 
the broader economic consequences of the suspension of concessions or other 
obligations; 
 
 
(e) 
if that party decides to request authorization to suspend concessions or other 
obligations pursuant to subparagraphs (b) or (c), it shall state the reasons therefor in 
its request.  At the same time as the request is forwarded to the DSB, it also shall be 
forwarded to the relevant Councils and also,  in the case of a request pursuant to 
subparagraph (b), the relevant sectoral bodies; 
 
(f) 
for purposes of this paragraph, "sector" means: 
 
 
 
(i) 
with respect to goods, all goods; 
 
(ii) 
with respect to services, a principal sector as identified in the current 
"Services Sectoral Classification List" which identifies such sectors;28 
 
 
(iii)  
with respect to trade-related intellectual property rights, each of the 
categories of intellectual property rights covered in Section 1, or Section 2, or 
Section 3, or Section 4, or Section 5, or Section 6, or Section 7 of Part II, or 
the obligations under Part III, or Part IV of the Agreement on TRIPS; 
 
(g) 
for purposes of this paragraph, "agreement" means: 
 
(i)  
with respect to goods, the agreements listed in Annex 1A of the WTO 
Agreement, taken as a whole as well as the Plurilateral Trade Agreements in 
so far as the relevant parties to the dispute are parties to these agreements; 
 
(ii)  
with respect to services, the GATS; 
 
(iii)  
with respect to intellectual property rights, the Agreement on TRIPS. 
 
4. 
The level of the suspension of concessions or other obligations authorized by the DSB shall 
be equivalent to the level of the nullification or impairment. 
 
5. 
The DSB shall not authorize suspension of concessions or other obligations if a covered 
agreement prohibits such suspension. 
 
6. 
When the situation described in paragraph 2 occurs, the DSB, upon request, shall grant 
authorization to suspend concessions or other obligations within 30 days of the expiry of the 
reasonable period of time unless the DSB decides by consensus to reject the request.  However, if the 
Member concerned objects to the level of suspension proposed, or claims that the principles and 
procedures set forth in paragraph 3 have not been followed where a complaining party  has requested 
                                                      
28 The list in document MTN.GNS/W/120 identifies eleven sectors. 
 
 
94
authorization to suspend concessions or other obligations pursuant to paragraph 3(b) or (c), the matter 
shall be referred to arbitration. Such arbitration shall be carried out by the original panel, if members 
are available, or by an arbitrator29 appointed by the Director-General and shall be completed within 60 
days after the date of expiry of the reasonable period of time.  Concessions or other obligations shall 
not be suspended during the course of the arbitration. 
 
7. 
The arbitrator30 acting pursuant to paragraph 6 shall not examine the nature of the concessions 
or other obligations to be suspended but shall determine whether the level of such suspension is 
equivalent to the level of nullification or impairment.  The arbitrator may also determine if the 
proposed suspension of concessions or other obligations is allowed under the covered agreement.  
However, if the matter referred to arbitration includes a claim that the principles and procedures set 
forth in paragraph 3 have not been followed, the arbitrator shall examine that claim.  In the event the 
arbitrator determines that those principles and procedures have not been followed, the complaining 
party shall apply them consistent with paragraph 3.  The parties shall accept the arbitrator's decision 
as final and the parties concerned shall not seek a second arbitration.  The DSB shall be informed 
promptly of the decision of the arbitrator and shall upon request, grant authorization to suspend 
concessions or other obligations where the request is consistent with the decision of the arbitrator, 
unless the DSB decides by consensus to reject the request. 
 
8. 
The suspension of concessions or other obligations shall be temporary and shall only be 
applied until such time as the measure found to be inconsistent with a covered agreement has been 
removed, or the Member that must implement recommendations or rulings provides a solution to the 
nullification or impairment of benefits, or a mutually satisfactory solution is reached.  In accordance 
with paragraph 6 of Article 21, the DSB shall continue to keep under surveillance the implementation 
of adopted recommendations or rulings, including those cases where compensation has been provided 
or concessions or other obligations have been suspended but the recommendations to bring a measure 
into conformity with the covered agreements have not been implemented. 
 
9. 
The dispute settlement provisions of the covered agreements may be invoked in respect of 
measures affecting their observance taken by regional or local governments or authorities within the 
territory of a Member.  When the DSB has ruled that a provision of a covered agreement has not been 
observed, the responsible Member shall take such reasonable measures as may be available to it to 
ensure its observance.  The provisions of the covered agreements and this Understanding relating to 
compensation and suspension of concessions or other obligations apply in cases where it has not been 
possible to secure such observance.31 
 
 
Article 23 
 
Strengthening of the Multilateral System 
 
1. 
When Members seek the redress of a violation of obligations or other nullification or 
impairment of benefits under the covered agreements or an impediment to the attainment of any 
objective of the covered agreements, they shall have recourse to, and abide by, the rules and 
procedures of this Understanding. 
 
2. 
In such cases, Members shall: 
 
(a)  
not make a determination to the effect that a violation has occurred, that benefits have 
been nullified or impaired or that the attainment of any objective of the covered 
                                                      
29 The expression"arbitrator" shall be interpreted as referring either to an individual or a group. 
30 The expression "arbitrator" shall be interpreted as referring either to an individual or a group or to the 
members of the original panel when serving in the capacity of arbitrator.   
31 Where the provisions of any covered agreement concerning measures taken by regional or local 
governments or authorities within the territory of a Member contain provisions different from the provisions of 
this paragraph, the provisions of such covered agreement shall prevail. 
 
 
95
agreements has been impeded, except through recourse to dispute settlement in 
accordance with the rules and procedures of this Understanding, and shall make any 
such determination consistent with the findings contained in the panel or Appellate 
Body report adopted by the DSB or an arbitration award rendered under this 
Understanding; 
 
 
(b)  
follow the procedures set forth in Article 21 to determine the reasonable period of 
time for the Member concerned to implement the recommendations and rulings;  and 
 
 
(c) 
follow the procedures set forth in Article 22 to determine the level of suspension of 
concessions or other obligations and obtain DSB authorization in accordance with 
those procedures before suspending concessions or other obligations under the 
covered agreements in response to the failure of the Member concerned to implement 
the recommendations and rulings within that reasonable period of time. 
 
 
Article 24 
 
Special Procedures Involving Least-Developed Country Members 
 
1. 
At all stages of the determination of the causes of a dispute and of dispute settlement 
procedures involving a least-developed country Member, particular consideration shall be given to the 
special situation of least-developed country Members.  In this regard, Members shall exercise due 
restraint in raising matters under these procedures involving a least-developed country Member.  If 
nullification or impairment is found to result from a measure taken by a least-developed country 
Member, complaining parties shall exercise due restraint in asking for compensation or seeking 
authorization to suspend the application of concessions or other obligations pursuant to these 
procedures.  
 
2.  
In dispute settlement cases involving a least-developed country Member, where a satisfactory 
solution has not been found in the course of consultations the Director-General or the Chairman of the 
DSB shall, upon request by a least-developed country Member offer their good offices, conciliation 
and mediation with a view to assisting the parties to settle the dispute, before a request for a panel is 
made. The Director-General or the Chairman of the DSB, in providing the above assistance, may 
consult any source which either deems appropriate. 
 
 
Article 25 
 
Arbitration 
 
1. 
Expeditious arbitration within the WTO as an alternative means of dispute settlement can 
facilitate the solution of certain disputes that concern issues that are clearly defined by both parties.  
 
2. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Understanding, resort to arbitration shall be subject to 
mutual agreement of the parties which shall agree on the procedures to be followed.  Agreements to 
resort to arbitration shall be notified to all Members sufficiently in advance of the actual 
commencement of the arbitration process.  
 
3. 
Other Members may become party to an arbitration proceeding only upon the agreement of 
the parties which have agreed to have recourse to arbitration.  The parties to the proceeding shall 
agree to abide by the arbitration award.  Arbitration awards shall be notified to the DSB and the 
Council or Committee of any relevant agreement where any Member may raise any point relating 
thereto.  
 
4.  
Articles 21 and 22 of this Understanding shall apply mutatis mutandis to arbitration awards.  
 
 
 
96
 
Article 26 
 
1. 
Non-Violation Complaints of  the Type Described in Paragraph 1(b) of Article XXIII of 
GATT 1994 
 
 
Where the provisions of paragraph 1(b) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994 are applicable to a 
covered agreement, a panel or the Appellate Body may only make rulings and recommendations 
where a party to the dispute considers that any benefit accruing to it directly or indirectly under the 
relevant covered agreement is being nullified or impaired or the attainment of any objective of that 
Agreement is being impeded as a result of the application by a Member of any measure, whether or 
not it conflicts with the provisions of that Agreement.  Where and to the extent that such party 
considers and a panel or the Appellate Body determines that a case concerns a measure that does not 
conflict with the provisions of a covered agreement to which the provisions of paragraph 1(b) of 
Article XXIII of GATT 1994 are applicable, the procedures in this Understanding shall apply, subject 
to the following: 
 
 
(a) 
the complaining party shall present a detailed justification in support of any 
complaint relating to a measure which does not conflict with the relevant covered 
agreement; 
 
 
(b) 
where a measure has been found to nullify or impair benefits under, or impede the 
attainment of objectives, of the relevant covered agreement without violation thereof, 
there is no obligation to withdraw the measure.  However, in such cases, the panel or 
the Appellate Body shall recommend that the Member concerned make a mutually 
satisfactory adjustment; 
 
 
(c) 
notwithstanding the provisions of Article 21, the arbitration provided for in 
paragraph 3 of Article 21, upon request of either party, may include a determination 
of the level of benefits which have been nullified or impaired, and may also suggest 
ways and means of reaching a mutually satisfactory adjustment;  such suggestions 
shall not be binding upon the parties to the dispute; 
 
 
(d) 
notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 22, compensation may be 
part of a mutually satisfactory adjustment as final settlement of the dispute. 
 
2. 
Complaints of the Type Described in Paragraph 1(c) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994 
 
 
Where the provisions of paragraph 1(c) of Article XXIII of GATT 1994 are applicable to a 
covered agreement, a panel may only make rulings and recommendations where a party considers that 
any benefit accruing to it directly or indirectly under the relevant covered agreement is being nullified 
or impaired or the attainment of any objective of that Agreement is being impeded as a result of the 
existence of any situation other than those to which the provisions of paragraphs 1(a) and 1(b) of 
Article XXIII of GATT 1994 are applicable.  Where and to the extent that such party considers and a 
panel determines that the matter is covered by this paragraph, the procedures of this Understanding 
shall apply only up to and including the point in the proceedings where the panel report has been 
circulated to the Members.  The dispute settlement rules and procedures contained in the Decision of 
12 April 1989 (BISD 36S/61-67) shall apply to consideration for adoption, and surveillance and 
implementation of recommendations and rulings.  The following shall also apply: 
 
(a) 
the complaining party shall present a detailed justification in support of any argument 
made with respect to issues covered under this paragraph; 
 
(b) 
in cases involving matters covered by this paragraph, if a panel finds that cases also 
involve dispute settlement matters other than those covered by this paragraph, the 
panel shall circulate a report to the DSB addressing any such matters and a separate 
report on matters falling under this paragraph. 
 
 
97
 
 
Article 27 
 
Responsibilities of the Secretariat 
 
1. 
The Secretariat shall have the responsibility of assisting panels, especially on the legal, 
historical and procedural aspects of the matters dealt with, and of providing secretarial and technical 
support.  
 
2. 
While the Secretariat assists Members in respect of dispute settlement at their request, there 
may also be a need to provide additional legal advice and assistance in respect of dispute settlement to 
developing country Members.  To this end, the Secretariat shall make available a qualified legal 
expert from the WTO technical cooperation services to any developing country Member which so 
requests. This expert shall assist the developing country Member in a manner ensuring the continued 
impartiality of the Secretariat.  
 
3. 
The Secretariat shall conduct special training courses for interested Members concerning 
these dispute settlement procedures and practices so as to enable Members' experts to be better 
informed in this regard.  
 
 
APPENDIX 1 
 
AGREEMENTS COVERED BY THE UNDERSTANDING 
 
 
(A) 
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization 
 
(B) 
Multilateral Trade Agreements  
 
 
Annex 1A: 
Multilateral Agreements on Trade in Goods 
 
Annex 1B: 
General Agreement on Trade in Services 
Annex 1C: 
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
 
 
Annex 2: 
Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of 
Disputes 
 
(C) 
Plurilateral Trade Agreements 
 
 
Annex 4: 
Agreement on Trade in Civil Aircraft 
 
 
 
Agreement on Government Procurement 
 
 
 
International Dairy Agreement 
 
 
 
International Bovine Meat Agreement 
 
 
The applicability of this Understanding to the Plurilateral Trade Agreements shall be subject 
to the adoption of a decision by the parties to each agreement setting out the terms for the application 
of the Understanding to the individual agreement, including any special or additional rules or 
procedures for inclusion in Appendix 2, as notified to the DSB. 
 
 
98
APPENDIX 2 
 
SPECIAL OR ADDITIONAL RULES AND PROCEDURES 
CONTAINED IN THE COVERED AGREEMENTS 
 
 
Agreement Rules and Procedures 
 
Agreement on the Application of Sanitary  
and Phytosanitary Measures 
 
 
 
11.2 
 
Agreement on Textiles and Clothing 
2.14, 2.21, 4.4, 5.2, 5.4, 5.6, 6.9,  
6.10, 6.11, 8.1 through 8.12 
 
Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade 
14.2 through 14.4,  Annex 2 
 
Agreement on Implementation of Article VI 
of GATT 1994 
17.4 through 17.7 
 
Agreement on Implementation of Article VII 
of GATT 1994 
19.3 through 19.5, Annex II.2(f), 3, 9, 21 
 
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures 
4.2 through 4.12, 6.6, 7.2 through 7.10, 8.5, 
footnote 35, 24.4, 27.7, Annex V 
 
General Agreement on Trade in Services  
XXII:3, XXIII:3 
Annex on Financial Services 
4 
Annex on Air Transport Services 
4 
 
Decision on Certain Dispute Settlement 
 
Procedures for the GATS 
1 through 5 
 
 
 
The list of rules and procedures in this Appendix includes provisions where only a part of the 
provision may be relevant in this context. 
 
 
Any special or additional rules or procedures in the Plurilateral Trade Agreements as 
determined by the competent bodies of each agreement and as notified to the DSB. 
 
APPENDIX 3 
 
WORKING PROCEDURES 
 
 
l. 
In its proceedings the panel shall follow the relevant provisions of this Understanding.  In 
addition, the following working procedures shall apply. 
 
2. 
The panel shall meet in closed session.  The parties to the dispute, and interested parties, shall 
be present at the meetings only when invited by the panel to appear before it.   
 
3. 
The deliberations of the panel and the documents submitted to it shall be kept confidential.  
Nothing in this Understanding shall preclude a party to a dispute from disclosing statements of its 
own positions to the public.  Members shall treat as confidential information submitted by another 
Member to the panel which that Member has designated as confidential.  Where a party to a dispute 
submits a confidential version of its written submissions to the panel, it shall also, upon request of a 
Member, provide a non-confidential summary of the information contained in its submissions that 
could be disclosed to the public. 
 
 
99
 
4. 
Before the first substantive meeting of the panel with the parties, the parties to the dispute shall 
transmit to the panel written submissions in which they present the facts of the case and their 
arguments. 
 
5. 
At its first substantive meeting with the parties, the panel shall ask the party which has brought 
the complaint to present its case.   Subsequently, and still at the same meeting, the party against which 
the complaint has been brought shall be asked to present its point of view. 
 
6. 
All third parties which have notified their interest in the dispute to the DSB shall be invited in 
writing to present their views during a session of the first substantive meeting of the panel set aside 
for that purpose.  All such third parties may be present during the entirety of this session. 
 
7. 
Formal rebuttals shall be made at a second substantive meeting of the panel.  The party 
complained against shall have the right to take the floor first to be followed by the complaining party.  
The parties shall submit, prior to that meeting, written rebuttals to the panel.   
 
8. 
The panel may at any time put questions to the parties and ask them for explanations either in 
the course of a meeting with the parties or in writing. 
 
9. 
The parties to the dispute and any third party invited to present its views in accordance with 
Article 10 shall make available to the panel a written version of their oral statements. 
 
10. 
In the interest of full transparency, the presentations, rebuttals and statements referred to in 
paragraphs 5 to 9 shall be made in the presence of the parties.  Moreover, each party's written 
submissions, including any comments on the descriptive part of the report and responses to questions 
put by the panel, shall be made available to the other party or parties.   
 
11. 
Any additional procedures specific to the panel. 
 
12. 
Proposed timetable for panel work: 
 
(a)  
Receipt of first written submissions of the parties: 
 
 
(1) 
complaining Party: 
 
 
 _______ 
 
 
3-6 weeks 
 
(2) 
Party complained against: 
 
_______ 
 
 
2-3 weeks 
 
(b) 
Date, time and place of first substantive meeting  
 
with the parties;  third party session: 
 
_______ 
 
 
1-2 weeks 
 
(c)  
Receipt of written rebuttals of the parties: 
_______ 
 
 
2-3 weeks 
 
(d)  
Date, time and place of second substantive  
meeting with the parties: 
 
 
 
_______ 
 
 
1-2 weeks 
 
 
(e)  
Issuance of descriptive part of the report to the parties:_______ 
2-4 weeks 
 
 
(f)  
Receipt of comments by the parties on the  
 
 descriptive part of the report: 
_______ 
2 weeks 
 
 
 
(g) 
Issuance of the interim report, including the  
findings and conclusions, to the parties:_______ 
2-4 weeks 
 
 
(h) 
Deadline for party to request review of part(s) of report: 
_______ 
1 week 
 
 
(i) 
Period of review by panel, including possible  
 
 
100
additional meeting with parties: 
_______ 
2 weeks 
 
 
(j) 
Issuance of final report to parties to dispute: 
_______ 
2 weeks 
 
 
(k) 
Circulation of the final report to the Members: 
_______ 
3 weeks 
 
 
 
The above calendar may be changed in the light of unforeseen developments. Additional 
meetings with the parties shall be scheduled if required.  
 
APPENDIX 4 
 
EXPERT REVIEW GROUPS 
 
 
 
The following rules and procedures shall apply to expert review groups established in 
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 13. 
 
1. 
Expert review groups are under the panel's authority.  Their terms of reference and detailed 
working procedures shall be decided by the panel, and they shall report to the panel. 
 
2. 
Participation in expert review groups shall be restricted to persons of professional standing and 
experience in the field in question. 
 
3. 
Citizens of parties to the dispute shall not serve on an expert review group without the joint 
agreement of the parties to the dispute, except in exceptional circumstances when the panel considers 
that the need for specialized scientific expertise cannot be fulfilled otherwise. Government officials of 
parties to the dispute shall not serve on an expert review group.   Members of expert review groups 
shall serve in their individual capacities and not as government representatives, nor as representatives 
of any organization.  Governments or organizations shall therefore not give them instructions with 
regard to matters before an expert review group. 
 
4. 
Expert review groups may consult and seek information and technical advice from any source 
they deem appropriate.  Before an expert review group seeks such information or advice from a 
source within the jurisdiction of a Member, it shall inform the government of that Member.  Any 
Member shall respond promptly and fully to any request by an expert review group for such 
information as the expert review group considers necessary and appropriate. 
 
5. 
The parties to a dispute shall have access to all relevant information provided to an expert 
review group, unless it is of a confidential nature.  Confidential information provided to the expert 
review group shall not be released without formal authorization from the government, organization or 
person providing the information.  Where such information is requested from the expert review group 
but release of such information by the expert review group is not authorized, a non-confidential 
summary of the information will be provided by the government, organization or person supplying the 
information. 
 
6. 
The expert review group shall submit a draft report to the parties to the dispute with a view to 
obtaining their comments, and taking them into account, as appropriate, in the final report, which shall 
also be issued to the parties to the dispute when it is submitted to the panel.  The final report of the 
expert review group shall be advisory only. 
 
 
__________ 
 
 
