I 
(Legislative acts) 
DIRECTIVES 
DIRECTIVE 2011/7/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 
of 16 February 2011 
on combating late payment in commercial transactions 
(recast) 
(Text with EEA relevance) 
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE 
EUROPEAN UNION, 
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union, and in particular Article 114 thereof, 
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, 
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and 
Social Committee ( 1 ), 
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ), 
Whereas: 
(1) 
A number of substantive changes are to be made to 
Directive 2000/35/EC of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 29 June 2000 on combating late 
payment in commercial transactions ( 3 ). It is desirable, 
for reasons of clarity and rationalisation, that the 
provisions in question be recast. 
(2) 
Most goods and services are supplied within the internal 
market by economic operators to other economic 
operators and to public authorities on a deferred 
payment basis whereby the supplier gives its client time 
to pay the invoice, as agreed between parties, as set out 
in the supplier’s invoice or as laid down by law. 
(3) 
Many payments in commercial transactions between 
economic operators or between economic operators 
and public authorities are made later than agreed in the 
contract or laid down in the general commercial 
conditions. Although the goods are delivered or the 
services performed, many corresponding invoices are 
paid well after the deadline. Such late payment negatively 
affects 
liquidity 
and 
complicates 
the 
financial 
management of undertakings. It also affects their 
competitiveness and profitability when the creditor 
needs to obtain external financing because of late 
payment. The risk of such negative effects strongly 
increases in periods of economic downturn when 
access to financing is more difficult. 
(4) 
Judicial claims related to late payment are already 
facilitated by Council Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 of 
22 December 2000 on jurisdiction and the recognition 
and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial 
matters ( 4 ), Regulation (EC) No 805/2004 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 
2004 creating a European Enforcement Order for uncon­
tested claims ( 5 ), Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 
2006 
creating 
a 
European 
order 
for 
payment 
procedure ( 6 ) and Regulation (EC) No 861/2007 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 
establishing a European Small Claims Procedure ( 7 ). 
However, in order to discourage late payment in 
commercial transactions, it is necessary to lay down 
complementary provisions. 
(5) 
Undertakings should be able to trade throughout the 
internal market under conditions which ensure that 
transborder operations do not entail greater risks than 
domestic sales. Distortions of competition would ensue 
if substantially different rules applied to domestic and 
transborder operations.
EN 
23.2.2011 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 48/1 
( 1 ) OJ C 255, 22.9.2010, p. 42. 
( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 20 October 2010 (not yet 
published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 
24 January 2011. 
( 3 ) OJ L 200, 8.8.2000, p. 35. 
( 4 ) OJ L 12, 16.1.2001, p. 1. 
( 5 ) OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 15. 
( 6 ) OJ L 399, 30.12.2006, p. 1. 
( 7 ) OJ L 199, 31.7.2007, p. 1.
(6) 
In its Communication of 25 June 2008 entitled ‘ “Think 
Small First” — A “Small Business Act” for Europe’, the 
Commission emphasised that small and medium-sized 
enterprises’ (SMEs) access to finance should be facilitated 
and that a legal and business environment supportive of 
timely payments in commercial transactions should be 
developed. It should be noted that public authorities 
have a special responsibility in this regard. The criteria 
for the definition of SMEs are set out in Commission 
Recommendation 
2003/361/EC 
of 
6 
May 
2003 
concerning the definition of micro, small and medium- 
sized enterprises ( 1 ). 
(7) 
One of the priority actions of the Commission 
Communication 
of 
26 
November 
2008 
entitled 
‘European Economic Recovery Plan’ is the reduction of 
administrative burdens and the promotion of entrepre­
neurship by, inter alia, ensuring that, as a matter of 
principle, invoices, including to SMEs, for supplies and 
services are paid within 1 month to ease liquidity 
constraints. 
(8) 
The scope of this Directive should be limited to 
payments made as remuneration for commercial trans­
actions. This Directive should not regulate transactions 
with consumers, interest in connection with other 
payments, for instance payments under the laws on 
cheques and bills of exchange, or payments made as 
compensation for damages including payments from 
insurance 
companies. 
Furthermore, 
Member 
States 
should be able to exclude debts that are subject to 
insolvency proceedings, including proceedings aimed at 
debt restructuring. 
(9) 
This Directive should regulate all commercial transactions 
irrespective of whether they are carried out between 
private or public undertakings or between undertakings 
and public authorities, given that public authorities 
handle a considerable volume of payments to under­
takings. It should therefore also regulate all commercial 
transactions 
between 
main 
contractors 
and 
their 
suppliers and subcontractors. 
(10) 
The fact that the liberal professions are covered by this 
Directive should not oblige Member States to treat them 
as undertakings or merchants for purposes outside the 
scope of this Directive. 
(11) 
The delivery of goods and the provision of services for 
remuneration to which this Directive applies should also 
include the design and execution of public works and 
building and civil engineering works. 
(12) 
Late payment constitutes a breach of contract which has 
been made financially attractive to debtors in most 
Member States by low or no interest rates charged on 
late payments and/or slow procedures for redress. A 
decisive shift to a culture of prompt payment, including 
one in which the exclusion of the right to charge interest 
should always be considered to be a grossly unfair 
contractual term or practice, is necessary to reverse this 
trend and to discourage late payment. Such a shift should 
also include the introduction of specific provisions on 
payment periods and on the compensation of creditors 
for the costs incurred, and, inter alia, that the exclusion 
of the right to compensation for recovery costs should be 
presumed to be grossly unfair. 
(13) 
Accordingly, provision should be made for business-to- 
business contractual payment periods to be limited, as a 
general rule, to 60 calendar days. However, there may be 
circumstances in which undertakings require more 
extensive payment periods, for example when under­
takings wish to grant trade credit to their customers. It 
should therefore remain possible for the parties to 
expressly agree on payment periods longer than 60 
calendar days, provided, however, that such extension 
is not grossly unfair to the creditor. 
(14) 
In the interest of consistency of Union legislation, the 
definition 
of 
‘contracting 
authorities’ 
in 
Directive 
2004/17/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council 
of 
31 
March 
2004 
coordinating 
the 
procurement procedures of entities operating in the 
water, energy, transport and postal services sectors ( 2 ) 
and in Directive 2004/18/EC of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on the coor­
dination of procedures for the award of public works 
contracts, public supply contracts and public services 
contracts ( 3 ) should apply for the purposes of this 
Directive. 
(15) 
Statutory interest due for late payment should be 
calculated on a daily basis as simple interest, in 
accordance 
with 
Regulation 
(EEC, 
Euratom) 
No 
1182/71 of the Council of 3 June 1971 determining 
the rules applicable to periods, dates and time limits ( 4 ). 
(16) 
This Directive should not oblige a creditor to claim 
interest for late payment. In the event of late payment, 
this Directive should allow a creditor to resort to 
charging interest for late payment without giving any 
prior notice of non-performance or other similar notice 
reminding the debtor of his obligation to pay. 
(17) 
A debtor’s payment should be regarded as late, for the 
purposes of entitlement to interest for late payment, 
where the creditor does not have the sum owed at his 
disposal on the due date provided that he has fulfilled his 
legal and contractual obligations.
EN 
L 48/2 
Official Journal of the European Union 
23.2.2011 
( 1 ) OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 36. 
( 2 ) OJ L 134, 30.4.2004, p. 1. 
( 3 ) OJ L 134, 30.4.2004, p. 114. 
( 4 ) OJ L 124, 8.6.1971, p. 1.
(18) 
Invoices trigger requests for payment and are important 
documents in the chain of transactions for the supply of 
goods and services, inter alia, for determining payment 
deadlines. For the purposes of this Directive, Member 
States should promote systems that give legal certainty 
as regards the exact date of receipt of invoices by the 
debtors, including in the field of e-invoicing where the 
receipt of invoices could generate electronic evidence and 
which is partly governed by the provisions on invoicing 
contained 
in 
Council 
Directive 
2006/112/EC 
of 
28 November 2006 on the common system of value 
added tax ( 1 ). 
(19) 
Fair compensation of creditors for the recovery costs 
incurred due to late payment is necessary to discourage 
late payment. Recovery costs should also include the 
recovery of administrative costs and compensation for 
internal costs incurred due to late payment for which 
this Directive should determine a fixed minimum sum 
which may be cumulated with interest for late 
payment. Compensation in the form of a fixed sum 
should aim at limiting the administrative and internal 
costs linked to the recovery. Compensation for the 
recovery costs should be determined without prejudice 
to national provisions according to which a national 
court may award compensation to the creditor for any 
additional damage regarding the debtor’s late payment. 
(20) 
In addition to an entitlement to payment of a fixed sum 
to cover internal recovery costs, creditors should also be 
entitled to reimbursement of the other recovery costs 
they incur as a result of late payment by a debtor. 
Such costs should include, in particular, those incurred 
by creditors in instructing a lawyer or employing a debt 
collection agency. 
(21) 
This Directive should be without prejudice to the right of 
Member States to provide for fixed sums for compen­
sation of recovery costs which are higher and therefore 
more favourable to the creditor, or to increase those 
sums, inter alia, in order to keep pace with inflation. 
(22) 
This 
Directive should 
not 
prevent 
payments 
by 
instalments or staggered payments. However, each 
instalment or payment should be paid on the agreed 
terms and should be subject to the rules for late 
payment set out in this Directive. 
(23) 
As a general rule, public authorities benefit from more 
secure, predictable and continuous revenue streams than 
undertakings. In addition, many public authorities can 
obtain financing at more attractive conditions than 
undertakings. At the same time, public authorities 
depend less than undertakings on building stable 
commercial relationships for the achievement of their 
aims. Long payment periods and late payment by 
public authorities for goods and services lead to unjus­
tified costs for undertakings. It is therefore appropriate to 
introduce specific rules as regards commercial trans­
actions for the supply of goods or services by under­
takings to public authorities, which should provide in 
particular for payment periods normally not exceeding 
30 calendar days, unless otherwise expressly agreed in 
the contract and provided it is objectively justified in 
the light of the particular nature or features of the 
contract, and in any event not exceeding 60 calendar 
days. 
(24) 
However, account should be taken of the specific 
situation of public authorities carrying out economic 
activities of an industrial or commercial nature by 
offering goods or services on the market as a public 
undertaking. For that purpose, Member States should 
be allowed, under certain conditions, to extend the 
statutory payment period up to a maximum of 60 
calendar days. 
(25) 
A particular cause for concern in connection with late 
payment is the situation of health services in a large 
number of Member States. Healthcare systems, as a 
fundamental part of Europe’s social infrastructure, are 
often obliged to reconcile individual needs with the 
available finances, as the population of Europe ages, as 
expectations rise, and as medicine advances. All systems 
have to deal with the challenge of prioritising healthcare 
in a way that balances the needs of individual patients 
with the financial resources available. Member States 
should therefore be able to grant public entities 
providing healthcare a certain amount of flexibility in 
meeting their commitments. For that purpose, Member 
States should be allowed, under certain conditions, to 
extend the statutory payment period up to a maximum 
of 60 calendar days. Member States should, nonetheless, 
make every effort to ensure that payments in the 
healthcare sector 
are 
made 
within 
the 
statutory 
payment periods. 
(26) 
In order not to jeopardise the achievement of the 
objective of this Directive, Member States should ensure 
that in commercial transactions the maximum duration 
of a procedure of acceptance or verification does not 
exceed, as a general rule, 30 calendar days. Nevertheless, 
it should be possible for a verification procedure to 
exceed 30 calendar days, for example in the case of 
particularly complex contracts, when expressly agreed 
in the contract and in any tender documents and if it 
is not grossly unfair to the creditor. 
(27) 
The Union institutions are in a situation comparable to 
that of the public authorities of Member States with 
regard to their financing and commercial relationships. 
Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 of 
25 June 2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to 
the general budget of the European Communities ( 2 ) 
specifies that the validation, authorisation and payment 
of expenditure by Union institutions must be completed
EN 
23.2.2011 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 48/3 
( 1 ) OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1. 
( 2 ) OJ L 248, 16.9.2002, p. 1.
within the time limits laid down in its implementing 
rules. Those implementing rules are currently set out in 
Commission Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2342/2002 of 
23 December 2002 laying down detailed rules for the 
implementation of Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 
1605/2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the 
general budget of the European Communities ( 1 ), and 
specify the circumstances in which creditors which are 
paid late are entitled to receive default interest. In the 
context of the ongoing review of those Regulations, it 
should be ensured that the maximum time limits for 
payment by the Union institutions are aligned with 
statutory periods applicable to public authorities in 
accordance with this Directive. 
(28) 
This Directive should prohibit abuse of freedom of 
contract to the disadvantage of the creditor. As a 
result, where a term in a contract or a practice relating 
to the date or period for payment, the rate of interest for 
late payment or the compensation for recovery costs is 
not justified on the grounds of the terms granted to the 
debtor, or it mainly serves the purpose of procuring the 
debtor additional liquidity at the expense of the creditor, 
it may be regarded as constituting such an abuse. For 
that purpose, and in accordance with the academic ‘Draft 
Common Frame of Reference’, any contractual term or 
practice which grossly deviates from good commercial 
practice and is contrary to good faith and fair dealing 
should be regarded as unfair to the creditor. In particular, 
the outright exclusion of the right to charge interest 
should always be considered as grossly unfair, whereas 
the exclusion of the right to compensation for recovery 
costs should be presumed to be grossly unfair. This 
Directive should not affect national provisions relating 
to the way contracts are concluded or regulating the 
validity of contractual terms which are unfair to the 
debtor. 
(29) 
In the context of enhanced efforts to prevent the abuse 
of freedom of contract to the detriment of creditors, 
organisations officially recognised as representing under­
takings and organisations with a legitimate interest in 
representing undertakings should be able to take action 
before national courts or administrative bodies in order 
to prevent the continued use of contract terms or 
practices which are grossly unfair to the creditor. 
(30) 
In order to contribute to the achievement of the objective 
of this Directive, Member States should foster the spread 
of good practices, including by encouraging the publi­
cation of a list of prompt payers. 
(31) 
It is desirable to ensure that creditors are in a position to 
exercise a retention of title clause on a non-discrimi­
natory basis throughout the Union, if the retention of 
title clause is valid under the applicable national 
provisions designated by private international law. 
(32) 
This Directive only defines the term ‘enforceable title’ but 
should not regulate the various procedures for forced 
execution of such a title or the conditions under which 
forced execution of such a title can be stopped or 
suspended. 
(33) 
The consequences of late payment can be dissuasive only 
if they are accompanied by procedures for redress which 
are rapid and effective for the creditor. In accordance 
with the principle of non-discrimination set out in 
Article 18 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union, those procedures should be available 
to all creditors who are established in the Union. 
(34) 
In order to facilitate compliance with the provisions of 
this Directive, Member States should encourage recourse 
to mediation or other means of alternative dispute 
resolution. Directive 2008/52/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on 
certain aspects of mediation in civil and commercial 
matters ( 2 ) already sets a framework for systems of 
mediation at Union level, especially for cross-border 
disputes, without preventing its application to internal 
mediation 
systems. 
Member 
States 
should 
also 
encourage interested parties to draw up voluntary codes 
of conduct aimed, in particular, at contributing to the 
implementation of this Directive. 
(35) 
It is necessary to ensure that the recovery procedures for 
unchallenged 
claims 
related 
to 
late 
payment 
in 
commercial transactions be completed within a short 
period 
of 
time, 
including 
through 
an 
expedited 
procedure and irrespective of the amount of the debt. 
(36) 
Since the objective of this Directive, namely combating 
late payment in the internal market, cannot be 
sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can, 
therefore, by reason of its scale and effect, be better 
achieved at the Union level, the Union may adopt 
measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity 
as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. 
In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as set 
out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond 
what is necessary in order to achieve that objective. 
(37) 
The obligation to transpose this Directive into national 
law should be confined to those provisions which 
represent a substantive change as compared with 
Directive 2000/35/EC. The obligation to transpose the 
provisions which are unchanged arises under that 
Directive. 
(38) 
This Directive should be without prejudice to the obli­
gations of the Member States relating to the time limits 
for transposition into national law and application of 
Directive 2000/35/EC.
EN 
L 48/4 
Official Journal of the European Union 
23.2.2011 
( 1 ) OJ L 357, 31.12.2002, p. 1. 
( 2 ) OJ L 136, 24.5.2008, p. 3.
(39) 
In accordance with point 34 of the Interinstitutional 
Agreement on better law-making ( 1 ), Member States are 
encouraged to draw up, for themselves and in the interest 
of the Union, their own tables which will, as far as 
possible, illustrate the correlation between this Directive 
and their transposition measures, and to make those 
tables public, 
HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE: 
Article 1 
Subject matter and scope 
1. 
The aim of this Directive is to combat late payment in 
commercial transactions, in order to ensure the proper func­
tioning of the internal market, thereby fostering the competi­
tiveness of undertakings and in particular of SMEs. 
2. 
This Directive shall apply to all payments made as remu- 
neration for commercial transactions. 
3. 
Member States may exclude debts that are subject to 
insolvency proceedings instituted against the debtor, including 
proceedings aimed at debt restructuring. 
Article 2 
Definitions 
For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall 
apply: 
(1) ‘commercial transactions’ means transactions between 
undertakings 
or 
between 
undertakings 
and 
public 
authorities which lead to the delivery of goods or the 
provision of services for remuneration; 
(2) ‘public authority’ means any contracting authority, as 
defined in point (a) of Article 2(1) of Directive 
2004/17/EC and in Article 1(9) of Directive 2004/18/EC, 
regardless of the subject or value of the contract; 
(3) ‘undertaking’ means any organisation, other than a public 
authority, acting in the course of its independent economic 
or professional activity, even where that activity is carried 
out by a single person; 
(4) ‘late payment’ means payment not made within the 
contractual or statutory period of payment and where 
the conditions laid down in Article 3(1) or Article 4(1) 
are satisfied; 
(5) ‘interest for late payment’ means statutory interest for late 
payment or interest at a rate agreed upon between under­
takings, subject to Article 7; 
(6) ‘statutory interest for late payment’ means simple interest 
for late payment at a rate which is equal to the sum of the 
reference rate and at least eight percentage points; 
(7) ‘reference rate’ means either of the following: 
(a) for a Member State whose currency is the euro, either: 
(i) the interest rate applied by the European Central 
Bank 
to 
its most 
recent 
main 
refinancing 
operations; or 
(ii) the marginal interest rate resulting from variable- 
rate tender procedures for the most recent main 
refinancing operations of the European Central 
Bank; 
(b) for a Member State whose currency is not the euro, 
the equivalent rate set by its national central bank; 
(8) ‘amount due’ means the principal sum which should have 
been paid within the contractual or statutory period of 
payment, including the applicable taxes, duties, levies or 
charges specified in the invoice or the equivalent request 
for payment; 
(9) ‘retention of title’ means the contractual agreement 
according to which the seller retains title to the goods 
in question until the price has been paid in full; 
(10) ‘enforceable title’ means any decision, judgment or order 
for payment issued by a court or other competent 
authority, 
including 
those 
that 
are 
provisionally 
enforceable, whether for immediate payment or payment 
by instalments, which permits the creditor to have his 
claim against the debtor collected by means of forced 
execution. 
Article 3 
Transactions between undertakings 
1. 
Member States shall ensure that, in commercial trans­
actions between undertakings, the creditor is entitled to 
interest for late payment without the necessity of a reminder, 
where the following conditions are satisfied: 
(a) the creditor has fulfilled its contractual and legal obligations; 
and 
(b) the creditor has not received the amount due on time, 
unless the debtor is not responsible for the delay. 
2. 
Member States shall ensure that the applicable reference 
rate: 
(a) for the first semester of the year concerned shall be the rate 
in force on 1 January of that year; 
(b) for the second semester of the year concerned shall be the 
rate in force on 1 July of that year. 
3. 
Where the conditions set out in paragraph 1 are satisfied, 
Member States shall ensure the following: 
(a) that the creditor is entitled to interest for late payment from 
the day following the date or the end of the period for 
payment fixed in the contract; 
(b) where the date or period for payment is not fixed in the 
contract, that the creditor is entitled to interest for late 
payment upon the expiry of any of the following time 
limits: 
(i) 30 calendar days following the date of receipt by the 
debtor of the invoice or an equivalent request for 
payment;
EN 
23.2.2011 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 48/5 
( 1 ) OJ C 321, 31.12.2003, p. 1.
(ii) where the date of the receipt of the invoice or the 
equivalent request for payment is uncertain, 30 
calendar days after the date of receipt of the goods or 
services; 
(iii) where the debtor receives the invoice or the equivalent 
request for payment earlier than the goods or the 
services, 30 calendar days after the date of the receipt 
of the goods or services; 
(iv) where a procedure of acceptance or verification, by 
which the conformity of the goods or services with 
the contract is to be ascertained, is provided for by 
statute or in the contract and if the debtor receives 
the invoice or the equivalent request for payment 
earlier or on the date on which such acceptance or 
verification takes place, 30 calendar days after that date. 
4. 
Where a procedure of acceptance or verification, by which 
the conformity of the goods or services with the contract is to 
be ascertained, is provided for, Member States shall ensure that 
the maximum duration of that procedure does not exceed 30 
calendar days from the date of receipt of the goods or services, 
unless otherwise expressly agreed in the contract and provided 
it is not grossly unfair to the creditor within the meaning of 
Article 7. 
5. 
Member States shall ensure that the period for payment 
fixed in the contract does not exceed 60 calendar days, unless 
otherwise expressly agreed in the contract and provided it is not 
grossly unfair to the creditor within the meaning of Article 7. 
Article 4 
Transactions between undertakings and public authorities 
1. 
Member States shall ensure that, in commercial trans­
actions where the debtor is a public authority, the creditor is 
entitled upon expiry of the period defined in paragraphs 3, 4 or 
6 to statutory interest for late payment, without the necessity of 
a reminder, where the following conditions are satisfied: 
(a) the creditor has fulfilled its contractual and legal obligations; 
and 
(b) the creditor has not received the amount due on time, 
unless the debtor is not responsible for the delay. 
2. 
Member States shall ensure that the applicable reference 
rate: 
(a) for the first semester of the year concerned shall be the rate 
in force on 1 January of that year; 
(b) for the second semester of the year concerned shall be the 
rate in force on 1 July of that year. 
3. 
Member States shall ensure that in commercial trans­
actions where the debtor is a public authority: 
(a) the period for payment does not exceed any of the 
following time limits: 
(i) 30 calendar days following the date of receipt by the 
debtor of the invoice or an equivalent request for 
payment; 
(ii) where the date of receipt of the invoice or the 
equivalent request for payment is uncertain, 30 
calendar days after the date of the receipt of the 
goods or services; 
(iii) where the debtor receives the invoice or the equivalent 
request for payment earlier than the goods or the 
services, 30 calendar days after the date of the receipt 
of the goods or services; 
(iv) where a procedure of acceptance or verification, by 
which the conformity of the goods or services with 
the contract is to be ascertained, is provided for by 
statute or in the contract and if the debtor receives 
the invoice or the equivalent request for payment 
earlier or on the date on which such acceptance or 
verification takes place, 30 calendar days after that date; 
(b) the date of receipt of the invoice is not subject to a 
contractual agreement between debtor and creditor. 
4. 
Member States may extend the time limits referred to in 
point (a) of paragraph 3 up to a maximum of 60 calendar days 
for: 
(a) any public authority which carries out economic activities of 
an industrial or commercial nature by offering goods or 
services on the market and which is subject, as a public 
undertaking, to the transparency requirements laid down 
in Commission Directive 2006/111/EC of 16 November 
2006 on the transparency of financial relations between 
Member States and public undertakings as well as on 
financial transparency within certain undertakings ( 1 ); 
(b) public entities providing healthcare which are duly 
recognised for that purpose. 
If a Member State decides to extend the time limits in 
accordance with this paragraph, it shall send a report on such 
extension to the Commission by 16 March 2018. 
On that basis, the Commission shall submit a report to the 
European Parliament and the Council indicating which 
Member States have extended the time limits in accordance 
with this paragraph and taking into account the impact on 
the functioning of the internal market, in particular on SMEs. 
That report shall be accompanied by any appropriate proposals. 
5. 
Member States shall ensure that the maximum duration of 
a procedure of acceptance or verification referred to in point (iv) 
of point (a) of paragraph 3 does not exceed 30 calendar days 
from the date of receipt of the goods or services, unless 
otherwise expressly agreed in the contract and any tender 
documents and provided it is not grossly unfair to the 
creditor within the meaning of Article 7.
EN 
L 48/6 
Official Journal of the European Union 
23.2.2011 
( 1 ) OJ L 318, 17.11.2006, p. 17.
6. 
Member States shall ensure that the period for payment 
fixed in the contract does not exceed the time limits provided 
for in paragraph 3, unless otherwise expressly agreed in the 
contract and provided it is objectively justified in the light of 
the particular nature or features of the contract, and that it in 
any event does not exceed 60 calendar days. 
Article 5 
Payment schedules 
This Directive shall be without prejudice to the ability of parties 
to agree, subject to the relevant provisions of applicable 
national law, on payment schedules providing for instalments. 
In such cases, where any of the instalments is not paid by the 
agreed date, interest and compensation provided for in this 
Directive shall be calculated solely on the basis of overdue 
amounts. 
Article 6 
Compensation for recovery costs 
1. 
Member States shall ensure that, where interest for late 
payment becomes payable in commercial transactions in 
accordance with Article 3 or 4, the creditor is entitled to 
obtain from the debtor, as a minimum, a fixed sum of EUR 40. 
2. 
Member States shall ensure that the fixed sum referred to 
in paragraph 1 is payable without the necessity of a reminder 
and as compensation for the creditor’s own recovery costs. 
3. 
The creditor shall, in addition to the fixed sum referred to 
in paragraph 1, be entitled to obtain reasonable compensation 
from the debtor for any recovery costs exceeding that fixed sum 
and incurred due to the debtor’s late payment. This could 
include expenses incurred, inter alia, in instructing a lawyer or 
employing a debt collection agency. 
Article 7 
Unfair contractual terms and practices 
1. 
Member States shall provide that a contractual term or a 
practice relating to the date or period for payment, the rate of 
interest for late payment or the compensation for recovery costs 
is either unenforceable or gives rise to a claim for damages if it 
is grossly unfair to the creditor. 
In determining whether a contractual term or a practice is 
grossly unfair to the creditor, within the meaning of the first 
subparagraph, all circumstances of the case shall be considered, 
including: 
(a) any gross deviation from good commercial practice, 
contrary to good faith and fair dealing; 
(b) the nature of the product or the service; and 
(c) whether the debtor has any objective reason to deviate from 
the statutory rate of interest for late payment, from the 
payment period as referred to in Article 3(5), point (a) of 
Article 4(3), Article 4(4) and Article 4(6) or from the fixed 
sum as referred to in Article 6(1). 
2. 
For the purpose of paragraph 1, a contractual term or a 
practice which excludes interest for late payment shall be 
considered as grossly unfair. 
3. 
For the purpose of paragraph 1, a contractual term or a 
practice which excludes compensation for recovery costs as 
referred to in Article 6 shall be presumed to be grossly unfair. 
4. 
Member States shall ensure that, in the interests of 
creditors and competitors, adequate and effective means exist 
to prevent the continued use of contractual terms and practices 
which are grossly unfair within the meaning of paragraph 1. 
5. 
The means referred to in paragraph 4 shall include 
provisions whereby organisations officially recognised as repre­
senting undertakings, or organisations with a legitimate interest 
in representing undertakings may take action according to the 
applicable national law before the courts or before competent 
administrative bodies on the grounds that contractual terms or 
practices are grossly unfair within the meaning of paragraph 1, 
so that they can apply appropriate and effective means to 
prevent their continued use. 
Article 8 
Transparency and awareness raising 
1. 
Member States shall ensure transparency regarding the 
rights and obligations stemming from this Directive, including 
by making publicly available the applicable rate of statutory 
interest for late payment. 
2. 
The Commission shall make publicly available on the 
Internet details of the current statutory rates of interest which 
apply in all the Member States in the event of late payment in 
commercial transactions. 
3. 
Member States shall, where appropriate, use professional 
publications, promotion campaigns or any other functional 
means to increase awareness of the remedies for late payment 
among undertakings. 
4. 
Member States may encourage the establishment of 
prompt payment codes which set out clearly defined payment 
time limits and a proper process for dealing with any payments 
that are in dispute, or any other initiatives that tackle the crucial 
issue of late payment and contribute to developing a culture of 
prompt payment which supports the objective of this Directive.
EN 
23.2.2011 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 48/7
Article 9 
Retention of title 
1. 
Member States shall provide in conformity with the 
applicable national provisions designated by private inter­
national law that the seller retains title to goods until they 
are fully paid for if a retention of title clause has been 
expressly agreed between the buyer and the seller before the 
delivery of the goods. 
2. 
Member States may adopt or retain provisions dealing 
with down payments already made by the debtor. 
Article 10 
Recovery procedures for unchallenged claims 
1. 
Member States shall ensure that an enforceable title can be 
obtained, including through an expedited procedure and irre­
spective of the amount of the debt, normally within 90 calendar 
days of the lodging of the creditor’s action or application at the 
court or other competent authority, provided that the debt or 
aspects of the procedure are not disputed. Member States shall 
carry out this duty in accordance with their respective national 
laws, regulations and administrative provisions. 
2. 
National laws, regulations and administrative provisions 
shall apply the same conditions for all creditors who are estab­
lished in the Union. 
3. 
When calculating the period referred to in paragraph 1, 
the following shall not be taken into account: 
(a) periods for service of documents; 
(b) any delays caused by the creditor, such as periods devoted 
to correcting applications. 
4. 
This Article shall be without prejudice to the provisions of 
Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006. 
Article 11 
Report 
By 16 March 2016, the Commission shall submit a report to 
the European Parliament and the Council on the implemen­
tation of this Directive. The report shall be accompanied by 
any appropriate proposals. 
Article 12 
Transposition 
1. 
Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations 
and administrative provisions necessary to comply with Articles 
1 to 8 and 10 by 16 March 2013. They shall forthwith 
communicate to the Commission the text of those provisions. 
When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a 
reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such 
reference on the occasion of their official publication. They 
shall also include a statement that references in existing laws, 
regulations and administrative provisions to the repealed 
Directive shall be construed as references to this Directive. 
The methods of making such reference and the formulation 
of such statement shall be laid down by Member States. 
2. 
Member States shall communicate to the Commission the 
text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in 
the field covered by this Directive. 
3. 
Member States may maintain or bring into force 
provisions which are more favourable to the creditor than the 
provisions necessary to comply with this Directive. 
4. 
In transposing the Directive, Member States shall decide 
whether to exclude contracts concluded before 16 March 2013. 
Article 13 
Repeal 
Directive 2000/35/EC is repealed with effect from 16 March 
2013, without prejudice to the obligations of the Member 
States relating to the time limit for its transposition into 
national law and its application. However, it shall remain 
applicable to contracts concluded before that date to which 
this Directive does not apply pursuant to Article 12(4). 
References to the repealed Directive shall be construed as 
references to this Directive and be read in accordance with 
the correlation table set out in the Annex. 
Article 14 
Entry into force 
This Directive shall enter into force on the 20th day following 
its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. 
Article 15 
Addressees 
This Directive is addressed to the Member States. 
Done at Strasbourg, 16 February 2011. 
For the European Parliament 
The President 
J. BUZEK 
For the Council 
The President 
MARTONYI J.
EN 
L 48/8 
Official Journal of the European Union 
23.2.2011
ANNEX 
Correlation table 
Directive 2000/35/EC 
This Directive 
— 
Article 1(1) 
Article 1 
Article 1(2) 
Article 2(1), first subparagraph 
Article 2(1) 
Article 2(1), second subparagraph 
Article 2(2) 
Article 2(1), third subparagraph 
Article 2(3) 
Article 2(2) 
Article 2(4) 
— 
Article 2(5) 
— 
Article 2(6) 
— 
Article 2(7), introductory part 
— 
Article 2(8) 
Article 2(3) 
Article 2(9) 
Article 2(4) 
Article 2(7)(a) 
Article 2(5) 
Article 2(10) 
Article 3(1)(a) 
Article 3(3)(a) 
Article 3(1)(b), introductory part 
Article 3(3)(b), introductory part 
Article 3(1)(b)(i) 
Article 3(3)(b)(i) 
Article 3(1)(b)(ii) 
Article 3(3)(b)(ii) 
Article 3(1)(b)(iii) 
Article 3(3)(b)(iii) 
Article 3(1)(b)(iv) 
Article 3(3)(b)(iv) 
— 
Article 3(4) 
— 
Article 3(5) 
Article 3(1)(c) 
Article 3(1) 
Article 3(1)(d), first and third sentences 
— 
Article 3(1)(d), second sentence 
Article 2(7)(b) 
— 
Article 3(2) 
— 
Article 4 
— 
Article 5 
— 
Article 6(1) 
— 
Article 6(2) 
Article 3(1)(e) 
Article 6(3)
EN 
23.2.2011 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 48/9
Directive 2000/35/EC 
This Directive 
Article 3(2) 
— 
Article 3(3) 
Article 7(1) 
— 
Article 7(2) 
— 
Article 7(3) 
Article 3(4) 
Article 7(4) 
Article 3(5) 
Article 7(5) 
— 
Article 8 
Article 4 
Article 9 
Article 5(1), (2) and (3) 
Article 10(1), (2) and (3) 
Article 5(4) 
— 
— 
Article 10(4) 
— 
Article 11 
Article 6(1) 
— 
— 
Article 12(1) 
Article 6(2) 
Article 12(3) 
Article 6(3) 
Article 1(3) 
Article 6(4) 
Article 12(2) 
Article 6(5) 
— 
— 
Article 12(4) 
— 
Article 13 
Article 7 
Article 14 
Article 8 
Article 15 
— 
Annex
EN 
L 48/10 
Official Journal of the European Union 
23.2.2011
