 
 
General Terms and Conditions of Sale for Goods 
 
March 24, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Definitions  
The following capitalized terms shall have the meaning set out below: 
GTCS means the following General Terms and Conditions of Sale. 
The Seller means MANE USA INC. or any of its subsidiaries. 
The Buyer means any individual or legal entity ordering or purchasing Products 
from the Seller. 
Products means the materials proposed or supplied by the Seller to the Buyer.  
Information means commercial, financial, technical and/or scientific information 
whatsoever disclosed by the Seller to the Buyer within the framework of the 
sale of the Products, including but not limited to technical specifications, 
formulae, samples, methods and know-how. 
Party means the collective or individual designation of the Buyer and the 
Seller. 
Unless clearly inappropriate, singular terms refer also to the plural number and 
vice versa. 
2. Applicability of the GTCS 
These GTCS apply to all sales of Products by the Seller and set forth the terms 
and conditions under which the Seller accepts to supply the Products to the 
Buyer.   
Any additional or different terms and conditions of purchase are expressly 
rejected. No specific term issued by the Buyer which may appear on the 
purchase order or on any document communicated by the Buyer, shall alter or 
prevail over these GTCS unless agreed in writing by the Seller.  
Unless stated otherwise in the offer, price and delivery quotations are valid for 
30 days from issue and subject to confirmation upon receipt of order. 
3. Orders  
Any order placed by the Buyer with the Seller implies the acceptance of the 
GTCS without any reservations. The orders are only binding on the Seller upon 
issuance of Seller’s order confirmation  
No order modification or cancellation will be permitted except with the prior 
written consent of the Seller, subject to cost and schedule impact. 
Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Seller, the minimum order is US$500 
(taxes excluded). 
4. Delivery and Risk of Loss 
Delivery dates are specified by the Seller on the order confirmation for 
estimates and not a guarantee. Delivery after the date shown shall not allow 
the Buyer to cancel the order, reject the Products or claim damages.  
Except otherwise stated on the order confirmation or approved in writing by the 
Seller, shipping term is FCA Seller’s factory (Incoterms 2020). 
5. Inspection Period 
Upon receipt of the Products, the Buyer shall examine the Products. Notes 
about shortages, excess, alteration or apparently damaged Products must be 
noted on the bill of lading and reported to the carrier.  
Buyer must notify seller of any rejection of the Products five (5) days of 
delivery. Failure to reject the goods within this time shall be deemed an 
acceptance.For any defect not reasonably discoverable by the Buyer upon 
receipt, the Buyer shall, give notice to the Seller within five (5) days following 
the discovery of the defect, and no later than ninety (90) days after delivery of 
the Products.  
The Products may not be returned to the Seller without its prior written 
approval. 
Any claims are subject to verification by Seller via sampling or at Buyer’s 
premises, at Seller’s sole election.  No claims wil be accepted after the 
Products are resold, incorporated, or altered by Buyer. 
6. Prices 
All prices are net and exclusive of any applicable taxes, customs duties, 
delivery and insurance costs. Unless otherwise agreed, prices are quoted in 
US Dollars FCA Seller’s factory (Incoterms 2020). Quoted prices are subject to 
change due to increases in raw materials. 
7. Payment 
The invoices are payable NET 30 by check, ACH, or wire transfer, unless 
otherwise agreed in writing by the Seller or stated on the invoice.Amounts 
outstanding beyond the stated due date shall bear interest at the rate of one 
percent (1%) per month, compounding monthly. Buyer shall be responsible for 
all reasonable costs incurred in collecting past due invoices, including 
attorney’s fees. 
Buyer grants Seller a security interest in any Products delivered until payment 
is made in full. 
8. Retention of title 
Title shall transfer upon payment in full of associated invoices. 
9. Warranty 
The Seller warrants that the Products comply with the technical specifications 
provided by the Seller. 
ALL WARRANTIES OTHER THAN THOSE SET FORTH IN THESE GTCS, 
WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING IMPLIED WARRANTIES 
OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, 
ARE EXPRESSELY EXCLUDED. 
 
The warranty shall not apply to the extent that: 
- the claim has not been submitted in accordance with section 5, above 
- the claim has been waived due to the resale, incorporation, or alteration of 
the Products by the Buyer or a third party.  
- the Buyer has made an improper use of the Products or failed to preserve or 
store the Products according to the Seller’s instructions. 
In the event of non-conformance with the agreed-to specifications, Seller may, 
at its sole discretion, replace the Products at its own expense or reimburse the 
defective Products  as the Buyer’s sole and complete remedy for non-
conforming Products. 
10. Purpose and Preservation of the Products. 
The Products are to be incorporated into Buyer’s final products.  
The Buyer must not resell or repackage the Products in order to distribute the 
same to third parties without incorporation without Seller’s consent. 
It is the Buyer’s responsibility to ensure that its own final products incorporating 
Products incorporation comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the 
country in which the same are marketed. 
11. Liability 
In no event shall the Seller be liable for any special, indirect, incidental, 
punitive or consequential damages of any kind, including, without limitation, 
loss of use, loss of profits or revenues or other economic loss. THE SELLER’S 
AGGREGATE LIABILITY, IN RESPECT OF THE SALE OF THE PRODUCTS 
TO THE BUYER, SHALL NOT EXCEED THE PURCHASE PRICE OF THE 
PRODUCTS AT ISSUE.    
12. Intellectual Property 
All intellectual property rights related to the Products, including but not limited 
to patents, know-how, trademarks, copyrights and any intellectual property 
right whether registered or not, are and shall remain the exclusive property of 
the Seller. 
No intellectual property right is either assigned or granted to the Buyer as a 
result of the sale of the Products. The Seller grants the Buyer a right to use the 
Products for the sole purpose of manufacturing and marketing the Buyer’s 
products.  
The Buyer will not apply for any intellectual property title or seek protection in 
respect of the Information disclosed by the Seller or the inventions, know-how 
or technologies developed by the Seller and related to Products. 
13. Confidentiality 
The Information is confidential and will not be disclosed or used by the 
Buyerfor any purpose other than expressly authorized by the Seller. 
This confidentiality obligation shall remain applicable indefinitely. 
The Buyer shall not perform directly, or indirectly by way of a third party, any 
analysis of the Products for purposes of reverse engineering, copying, or 
substitution. 
14. Force Majeure 
The Parties shall not be held liable for the non-performance of any of its 
obligations when directly or indirectly due to an event of force majeure 
including but not limited to strike, lock-out, equipment breakdown, epidemic, 
defect of raw materials or delays caused by a subcontractor or a supplier, 
inability to pass the cost of a substantial rise in the price of labour or raw 
materials, or an act of God.  
The event of force majeure suspends the performance of the affected Party’s 
obligations for the duration of the event. In case of an event of force majeure 
exceeding three (3) month, each Party shall be entitled to terminate the 
unperformed part of the order. 
15. Assignment or Transfer  
The Buyer shall neither transfer nor assign all or part of its rights and 
obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of the Seller. 
16. Miscellaneous 
Failure by the Seller to exercise any of its rights shall not be deemed to be a 
waiver of any such right in the future. 
If any of the provisions contained in these GTCS shall be illegal or 
unenforceable for any cause or reason whatsoever, such illegality or 
unenforceability shall not affect the other provisions hereof. 
17. Languages  
In the event of any conflict between the English version of the GTCS and any 
translation into another language, the English version shall control. 
18. Applicable Law and Jurisdiction 
The GTCS and all sales hereunder are governed by law of the State of Ohio, 
without regard to its conflict of laws rules. Any dispute arising out of or in 
connection with the execution and/or interpretation of the GTCS shall be 
subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the state and federal courts of Warren 
County, Ohio. 
 
