 
 
General Terms and Conditions of Sales 
 
March 24, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 
Definitions 
The following capitalized terms shall have the meaning set out below: 
- GTCS means the following General Terms and Conditions of Sale. 
- The Seller means V. MANE FILS or any of its subsidiaries except ( i )  a l l  MANE 
American subsidiaries and (ii) all MANE Indian subsidiaries. 
- The Buyer means any individual or legal entity ordering or purchasing Products from 
the Seller. 
Products means the set of products and/or services proposed or supplied by the Seller 
to the Buyer. 
- Information means commercial, financial, technical and/or scientific information 
whatsoever disclosed by the Seller to the Buyer within the framework of the sale of the 
Products, including but not limited to technical specifications, formulae, samples, 
methods and know-how. 
- Party(ies): means the collective or individual designation of the Buyer and the Seller. 
2. 
Applicability of the GTCS 
The GTCS apply to all sales of Products by the Seller and set forth the terms and 
conditions under which the Seller accepts to supply the Products to the Buyer. 
The Buyer’s general terms and conditions of purchase are expressly rejected. No 
specific condition issued by the Buyer which may appear on the purchase order or on 
any document communicated by the Buyer, shall prevail over the GTCS, unless accepted 
in writing by the Seller. 
Unless expressly stated otherwise in Seller’s offer, the Seller’s offer is valid for 30 (thirty) 
days from date of issue. 
3. 
Orders 
Any order placed by the Buyer with the Seller implies the acceptance of these GTCS 
without any reservations. The orders are only binding on the Seller subject to prior 
acceptance in writing from the Seller. 
No order modification shall be made without the prior written consent of the Seller. Prices 
and delivery dates shall be revised accordingly. 
Orders are not subject to cancellation. 
Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Seller, the minimum order is 2000 euros 
(taxes excluded), including 1000 euros per Product or the equivalent amount in the 
relevant currency if the price is not quoted in Euros. 
4. 
Delivery and transfer of risks 
Delivery dates specified by the Seller on the order confirmation are mere guidance 
without any guarantee. Delivery after delivery the date specified shall not be cause for the 
Buyer to cancel the order, reject the Products or claim damages. 
Except otherwise stated on the order confirmation as per the Incoterm or approved in 
writing by the Seller, the Products are delivered FCA (Incoterms ICC 2020), and 
notwithstanding any terms of delivery or payment of the transportation costs agreed 
between the Parties, the risks of loss or damaging shall pass to the Buyer upon collection 
of the Products by the first carrier at the Seller’s premises, plants or warehouses. 
5. 
Reception of the Products and Claims 
Upon receipt of the Products, the Buyer shall examine carefully the conformity of the 
Products. Remarks concerning shortages, excess, alteration or apparently damaged 
Products must be immediately clearly noted on the transport documents. 
All claims relating to the Products must be notified in writing to the Seller within 5 (five) 
days from delivery. In the event Buyer fails to notify Seller of its claim within the above 
prescribed time, the Products shall be deemed to have been irrevocably accepted by the 
Buyer and no subsequent claim for non-conformity of the Products or for obvious defects 
shall be valid. 
For any defect not reasonably noticeable by the Buyer upon receipt, despite a careful 
inspection, the Buyer shall give notice to the Seller within 5 (five) days following the 
discovery of the defect, and in any event no later than 3 (three) months after delivery of 
the Products. 
The Products may not be returned to the Seller without its prior written approval. 
The Buyer must justify the claim and grant the Seller a reasonable opportunity to inspect 
the Products (directly at the Buyer‘s premises or by means of samples). The Buyer shall 
communicate to the Seller any element or information necessary to verify the claim. 
No claim will be valid once the Products have been transferred, resold to a third party or 
have undergone any treatment or processing. 
6. 
Prices 
All prices are net and exclusive of VAT or any other tax, customs duties, delivery and 
insurance costs. Unless otherwise agreed, prices are quoted in euros FCA 
(Incoterms ICC 2020). Regarding staggered deliveries related to a single order or prices 
offers including a limited duration of validity, the Seller reserves the right to revise prices 
previously agreed upon, at any time, in case of a substantial rise in the price of labour or 
raw materials. 
7. 
Payment 
The invoices are payable without discount to the Seller’s invoicing address, by bank 
transfer in euros and within 30 (thirty) days from invoice date, unless otherwise agreed in 
writing by the Seller or stated on the invoice. 
Buyer shall have no right of set-off. 
Should the Buyer fail to settle one or several invoices, the Seller reserves the right to 
suspend further deliveries or to require security to be given. 
In accordance with article L 441-10 of the French Code de Commerce, in the event of 
delay in payment, overdue amounts shall bear interest at the rate applied by the 
European Central Bank to its most recent main refinancing operation plus 10 percentage 
points, without prior notice of default being required, in addition to an indemnity for debt 
collection expenses amounting to a lump sum of 40 euros. 
8. 
Retention of title 
THE PRODUCTS REMAIN THE ENTIRE PROPERTY OF THE SELLER UNTIL FULL 
PAYMENT OF THE PURCHASE PRICE AND ALL ANCILLARY CHARGES. In the 
event of overdue payment, the Seller is entitled to recover possession of the Products 
at the Buyer’s expense at any time until complete payment, without prejudice to claim 
damages. 
9. 
Warranty 
The Seller warrants that the Products comply with the technical specifications provided 
by the Seller. 
ALL WARRANTIES OTHER THAN THOSE SET FORTH IN THE GTCS, WHETHER 
EXPRESS 
OR 
IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING 
IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES 
OF 
MERCHANTABILITY   AND   FITNESS   FOR   A   PARTICULAR   PURPOSE, ARE 
EXPRESSELY EXCLUDED. 
The warranty shall not apply to the extent that: 
- the claim has not been submitted in accordance with clause 5 above 
- 
the claim is not allowed due to the transfer, resale, treatment or processing of the 
Products by the Buyer or a third party. 
- the Buyer has breached its duty of care and made an improper use of the Products or 
failed to preserve or store the Products according to the Seller’s instructions. 
In case of non-conformity or proven defect acknowledged by the Seller, the latter may, at 
its sole discretion, replace the Products at its own expense or reimburse the defective 
Products. If Seller completes any of the foregoing remedies, it shall be the sole 
compensation for the defectiveness of the Products and be exclusive of any other 
compensation or damages in respect thereof. 
10. Purpose and preservation of the Products 
The Products are exclusively intended to be integrated into the Buyer’s final products. The 
Buyer is not allowed to resell the Products “as is” or to repackage the Products in order 
to distribute the same to third parties without the prior written approval of the Seller. 
It is the Buyer’s responsibility to ensure that the said final products comply with all 
applicable laws and regulations of the country in which the same are marketed. 
The Seller shall not be held liable for the Product’s suitability to the use intended by the 
Buyer, notwithstanding any information given by the Seller. 
The Buyer undertakes to handle, preserve and store Products in compliance with the 
Seller’s recommendations and in a proper manner in consideration of the nature of the 
Products. 
11. Liability 
In no event shall the Seller be held liable for any special, indirect, incidental, punitive or 
consequential damages of any kind, including, without limitation, loss of use, loss of 
profits or revenues or other economic loss. THE SELLER’S AGGREGATE LIABILITY, 
IN RESPECT OF THE SALE OF THE PRODUCTS TO THE BUYER, SHALL NOT 
EXCEED THE AMOUNT OF THE ORDER OF THE PRODUCTS HAVING GIVEN RISE 
TO THE CLAIM. 
12. Intellectual Property 
All intellectual property rights related to the Products, including but not limited to patents, 
know-how, trademarks, copyrights and any intellectual property right whether registered 
or not, are and shall remain the exclusive property of the Seller. 
No intellectual property right is either assigned or granted to the Buyer as a result of the 
sale of the Products. The Seller grants the Buyer a right to use the Products for the sole 
purpose of manufacturing and marketing the Buyer’s products. 
The Buyer may not apply for any intellectual property title or seek protection in respect of 
the Information disclosed by the Seller or the inventions, know-how or technologies 
developed by the Seller and related to Products. 
13. Confidentiality 
The Information shall be held in strict confidence by the Buyer. The Buyer agrees to hold 
the Information in confidence and not to disclose the same to third parties nor to use 
the same for any purpose other than expressly authorized by the Seller. 
This confidentiality obligation shall not expire by the passage of time. 
The Buyer shall not perform directly, or indirectly by way of a third party, any analysis of 
the Products samples, in order to determine their chemical structure or composition 
and/or manufacturing process. Samples are supplied by the Seller for the exclusive 
purpose of evaluation and shall not be subject to commercial use. 
14. Personal data  
In accordance with Law No. 78-17 of January 6, 1978 as amended and General Data 
Protection Regulation 2016/679 of April 27, 2016, personal data concerning the Buyer is 
subject to computer processing by the Seller, acting as data controller, in order to carry 
out processes related to the management of trade relations in the context of the supply of 
Products for the period strictly necessary for their completion. For more information and 
exercise of the rights of the Buyer, the data protection officer of the Seller may be 
contacted at the e-mail address: dpo@mane.com. 
15. Force Majeure 
The Seller shall not be held liable for the non-performance of any of its obligations when 
directly or indirectly due to an event of force majeure including but not limited to strike, 
lock-out, equipment breakdown, epidemic, defect of raw materials or delays caused 
by a subcontractor or a supplier, inability to pass the cost of a substantial rise in the price 
of labour or raw materials. 
The event of force majeure suspends the performance of the Seller’s obligations for the 
duration of the event. In case of an event of force majeure exceeding 3 (three) months, 
each Party shall be entitled to terminate the unperformed portion of the order. 
16. Assignment or Transfer 
The Buyer shall neither transfer nor assign all or part of its rights and obligations 
hereunder without the prior written consent of the Seller. 
17. Miscellaneous 
Failure by the Seller to exercise any of its rights shall not be deemed to be a waiver of 
any such right in the future. 
If any of the provisions contained in these GTCS shall be illegal or unenforceable for any 
cause or reason whatsoever, such illegality or unenforceability shall not affect the other 
provisions hereof. 
18. Languages 
In the event of any conflict between the English version of the GTCS and any translation 
into another language, the English version shall control. 
19. Applicable Law and Jurisdiction 
The GTCS and all sales hereunder are governed by French laws. Any dispute arising out 
of or in connection with the execution and/or interpretation of the GTCS shall be subject to 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the COURTS OF NICE (FRANCE).  
