INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
Contents
INTRODUCTION TO INCOTERMS® 2020  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
RULES FOR ANY MODE OR MODES OF TRANSPORT . . . . . . . . . 19
EXW | Ex Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
FCA | Free Carrier  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
CPT | Carriage Paid To  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
CIP | Carriage and Insurance Paid To . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
DAP | Delivered at Place . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
DPU | Delivered at Place Unloaded  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
DDP | Delivered Duty Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
RULES FOR SEA AND INLAND WATERWAY TRANSPORT . . . . . . 91
FAS | Free Alongside Ship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
FOB | Free On Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
CFR | Cost and Freight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
CIF | Cost Insurance and Freight  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
ARTICLE-BY-ARTICLE TEXT OF RULES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
INCOTERMS® 2020 DRAFTING GROUP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
INCOTERMS® PUBLICATIONS AND RESOURCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
OTHER INTERNATIONAL TRADE RELATED PUBLICATIONS . . . 192
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 1
Introduction to Incoterms® 2020
1. The purpose of the text of this Introduction is fourfold:
``
to explain what the Incoterms® 2020 rules do and do NOT 
do and how they are best incorporated;
``
to set out the important fundamentals of the Incoterms® 
rules: the basic roles and responsibilities of seller and buyer, 
delivery, risk, and the relationship between the Incoterms® 
rules and the contracts surrounding a typical contract  
of sale for export/import and also, where appropriate,  
for domestic sales;
``
to explain how best to choose the right Incoterms® rule  
for the particular sale contract; and
``
to set out the central changes between Incoterms® 2010 
and Incoterms® 2020.
2. The Introduction follows this structure:
I.`
What the Incoterms® rules do
II.` What the Incoterms® rules do NOT do
III. 
How best to incorporate the Incoterms® rules 
IV. 
Delivery, risk and costs in the Incoterms® 2020 rules 
V. 
Incoterms® 2020 rules and the carrier
VI.  Rules for the contract of sale and their relationship  
to other contracts 
VII. The eleven Incoterms® 2020 rules—“sea and inland 
waterway” and “any mode(s) of transport”: getting  
it right
VIII. Order within the Incoterms® 2020 rules
IX. Differences between Incoterms® 2010  
and Incoterms® 2020
X. 
Caution with variants of Incoterms® rules
3. This Introduction gives guidance on the use of, and about  
the fundamental principles behind, the Incoterms® 2020 rules. 
INCOTERMS® 2020
2 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
 
I. WHAT THE INCOTERMS® RULES DO
4. The Incoterms® rules explain a set of eleven of the most 
 commonly-used three-letter trade terms, e.g. CIF, DAP, etc., 
reflecting business-to-business practice in contracts for the sale 
and purchase of goods. 
5. The Incoterms® rules describe:
``
Obligations: Who does what as between seller and buyer, 
e.g. who organises carriage or insurance of the goods  
or who obtains shipping documents and export or 
import licences;
``
Risk: Where and when the seller “delivers” the goods,  
in other words where risk transfers from seller to buyer; and
``
Costs: Which party is responsible for which costs, for 
example transport, packaging, loading or unloading costs, 
and checking or security-related costs.
The Incoterms® rules cover these areas in a set of ten articles, 
numbered A1/B1 etc., the A articles representing the seller’s 
obligations and the B articles representing the buyer’s obliga-
tions. See paragraph 53 below.
 
II. WHAT THE INCOTERMS® RULES DO NOT DO
6. The Incoterms® rules are NOT in themselves—and are therefore 
no substitute for—a contract of sale. They are devised to reflect 
trade practice for no particular type of goods—and for any. 
They can be used as much for the trading of a bulk cargo of 
iron ore as for five containers of electronic equipment or ten 
pallets of airfreighted fresh flowers. 
7. The Incoterms® rules do NOT deal with the following matters:
``
whether there is a contract of sale at all;
``
the specifications of the goods sold;
``
the time, place, method or currency of payment  
of the price; 
``
the remedies which can be sought for breach  
of the contract of sale;
``
most consequences of delay and other breaches  
in the performance of contractual obligations;
``
the effect of sanctions;
``
the imposition of tariffs; 
``
export or import prohibitions; 
``
force majeure or hardship;
``
intellectual property rights; or
``
the method, venue, or law of dispute resolution in case  
of such breach.
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 3
Perhaps most importantly, it must be stressed that the 
 Incoterms® rules do NOT deal with the transfer of property/
title/ownership of the goods sold. 
8. These are matters for which the parties need to make specific 
provision in their contract of sale. Failure to do so is likely to 
cause problems later if disputes arise about performance  
and breach. In essence, the Incoterms® 2020 rules are not 
themselves a contract of sale: they only become part of that 
contract when they are incorporated into a contract which 
already exists. Neither do the Incoterms® rules provide the law 
applicable to the contract. There may be legal regimes which 
apply to the contract, whether international, like the Conven-
tion on the International Sale of Goods (CISG);  
or domestic mandatory law relating, for example, to health  
and safety or the environment.
 
III. HOW BEST TO INCORPORATE THE INCOTERMS® RULES 
9. If parties want the Incoterms® 2020 rules to apply to their 
contract, the safest way to ensure this is to make that intention 
clear in their contract, through words such as
“[the chosen Incoterms® rule] [named port, place  
or point] Incoterms® 2020”. 
10. Thus, for example, 
CIF Shanghai Incoterms® 2020, or  
DAP No 123, ABC Street, Importland Incoterms® 2020.
11. Leaving the year out could cause problems that may be 
difficult to resolve. The parties, a judge or an arbitrator need  
to be able to determine which version of the Incoterms® rules 
applies to the contract.
12. The place named next to the chosen Incoterms® rule is even 
more important:
``
in all Incoterms® rules except the C rules, the named place 
indicates where the goods are “delivered”, i.e. where risk 
transfers from seller to buyer; 
``
in the D rules, the named place is the place of delivery and 
also the place of destination and the seller must organise 
carriage to that point;
``
in the C rules, the named place indicates the destination  
to which the seller must organise and pay for the carriage 
of the goods, which is not, however, the place or port  
of delivery. 
13. Thus, an FOB sale raising doubt about the port of shipment 
leaves both parties uncertain as to where the buyer must 
present the ship to the seller for the shipment and the trans-
port of the goods—and as to where the seller must deliver the 
goods on board so as to transfer risk in the goods from seller 
to buyer. Again, a CPT contract with an unclear named 
INCOTERMS® 2020
4 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
 destination will leave both parties in doubt as to the point  
to which the seller must contract and pay for the transport  
of the goods.
14. It is best to avoid these types of issues by being as geographi-
cally specific as possible in naming the port, place  
or point, as the case may be, in the chosen Incoterms® rule.
15. When incorporating a particular Incoterms® 2020 rule into a 
sale contract, it is not necessary to use the trademark symbol. 
For further guidance on trademark and copyright, please refer 
to https://iccwbo.org/incoterms-copyright/. 
 
IV. DELIVERY, RISK AND COSTS IN THE 
INCOTERMS® 2020 RULES
16. A named place or port attached to the three letters, e.g. CIP 
Las Vegas or CIF Los Angeles, then, is critical in the workings 
of the Incoterms® 2020 rules. Depending on which Incoterms® 
2020 rule is chosen, that place will identify either the place  
or port at which the goods are considered to have been 
“delivered” by the seller to the buyer, the place of “delivery”,  
or the place or port to which the seller must organise the 
carriage of the goods, i.e. their destination; or, in the case  
of the D rules, both. 
17. In all Incoterms® 2020 rules, A2 will define the place or port of 
“delivery”—and that place or port is closest to the seller in EXW 
and FCA (seller’s premises) and closest to the buyer in DAP, 
DPU and DDP.
18. The place or port of delivery identified by A2 is critical both  
for risk and for costs.
19. The place or port of delivery under A2 marks the place at 
which risk transfers from seller to buyer under A3. It is at that 
place or port that the seller performs its obligation to provide 
the goods under the contract as reflected in A1 such that the 
buyer cannot recover against the seller for the loss of or 
damage to the goods occurring after that point has passed.
20. The place or port of delivery under A2 also marks the central 
point under A9 which allocates costs to seller and buyer. In 
broad terms, A9 allocates costs before the point of delivery  
to the seller and costs after that point to the buyer. 
 
Delivery points  
Extremes and in-betweens: the four traditional Incoterms® 
rules groups
21. Versions of the Incoterms® rules before 2010 traditionally 
grouped the rules into four, namely E, F, C and D, with E and D 
lying at extreme poles from each other in terms of the point  
of delivery and the F and C rules lying in between. While the 
Incoterms® rules have, since 2010, been grouped according  
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 5
to the means of transport used, the old groupings are still 
helpful in understanding the point of delivery. Thus, the 
delivery point in EXW is an agreed point for collection of the 
goods by the buyer, whatever the destination to which the 
buyer will take them. At the other extreme in DAP, DPU and 
DDP, the delivery point is the same as the destination point to 
which the seller or its carrier will carry the goods. In the first, 
EXW, risk transfers before the transport cycle even starts; in 
the second, the D rules, risk transfers very late in that cycle. 
Again, in the first, EXW and, for that matter, FCA (seller’s 
premises), the seller performs its obligation to deliver the 
goods whether or not they actually arrive at their destination. 
In the second, the seller performs its obligation to deliver the 
goods only if they actually arrive at their destination.
22. The two rules at the extreme ends of the Incoterms® rules are 
EXW and DDP. However, traders should consider alternative 
rules to these two for their international contracts. Thus, with 
EXW the seller has to merely put the goods at the buyer’s 
disposal. This may cause problems for the seller and the buyer, 
respectively, with loading and export clearance. The seller 
would be better advised to sell under the FCA rule. Likewise, 
with DDP, the seller owes some obligations to the buyer which 
can only be performed within the buyer’s country, for example 
obtaining import clearance. It may be physically or legally 
difficult for the seller to carry out those obligations within the 
buyer’s country and a seller would therefore be better advised 
to consider selling goods in such circumstances under the DAP 
or DPU rules. 
23. Between the two extremes of E and D rules, there lie the three 
F rules (FCA, FAS and FOB), and the four C rules (CPT, CIP, 
CFR and CIF).
24. With all seven F and C rules, the place of delivery is on the 
seller’s side of the anticipated carriage: consequently sales 
using these Incoterms® rules are often called “shipment” sales. 
Delivery occurs, for example, 
a) when the goods are placed on board the vessel at the port 
of loading in CFR, CIF and FOB; or
b) by handing the goods over to the carrier in CPT and CIP; or 
c) by loading them on the means of transport provided by the 
buyer or placing them at the disposal of the buyer’s carrier 
in FCA. 
In the F and C groups, risk transfers at the seller’s end of the 
main carriage such that the seller will have performed its 
obligation to deliver the goods whether or not the goods 
actually arrive at their destination. This feature, of being 
shipment sales with delivery happening at the seller’s end early 
INCOTERMS® 2020
6 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
in the transit cycle, is common to the F and the C rules, 
whether they are the maritime Incoterms® rules or the 
 Incoterms® rules intended for any mode[s] of transport. 
25. The F and the C rules do, however, differ as to whether it is the 
seller or buyer who contracts for or arranges the carriage of 
the goods beyond the place or port of delivery. In the F rules, 
it is the buyer who makes such arrangements, unless the parties 
agree otherwise. In the C rules, this obligation falls to the seller.
26. Given that a seller on any of the C rules contracts for or 
arranges the carriage of the goods beyond delivery, the parties 
need to know what the destination is to which it must arrange 
carriage—and that is the place attached to the name of the 
Incoterms® rule, e.g. “CIF the port of Dalian” or “CIP the inland 
city of Shenyang”. Whatever that named destination is, that 
place is not and never becomes the place of delivery. Risk will 
have transferred on shipment or on handing over the goods at 
the place of delivery, but the contract of carriage must have 
been made by the seller for the named destination. Delivery 
and destination, then, in the C rules, are necessarily not the 
same place.
 
V. INCOTERMS® 2020 RULES AND THE CARRIER 
27. In the F and the C rules, placing the goods, for example, on 
board the vessel or handing them over to, or placing them at 
the disposal of, the carrier marks the point at which the goods 
are “delivered” by the seller to the buyer. Therefore this is the 
point at which risk transfers from the seller to the buyer. 
28. Given those two important consequences, it becomes essential 
to identify who the carrier is where there is more than one 
carrier, each carrying out a separate leg of transport, for 
instance by road, rail, air or sea. Of course, where the seller has 
taken the far more prudent course of making one contract of 
carriage with one carrier taking responsibility for the entire 
carriage chain, in a so-called “through” contract of carriage,  
the problem does not arise. However, where there is no such 
“through” carriage contract, the goods could be handed over 
(where the CIP or CPT rules are used) to a road-haulier or rail 
company for onward transmission to a sea carrier. The same 
situation may arise with exclusively maritime transport where, 
for example, the goods are first handed over to a river or 
feeder short-sea carrier for onward transmission to an 
ocean carrier. 
29. In these situations, when does the seller “deliver” the goods to 
the buyer: when it hands the goods over to the first, second or 
third carrier? 
30. Before we answer that question, a preliminary point. While  
in most cases the carrier will be an independent third party 
engaged under a contract of carriage by either the seller or the 
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 7
buyer (depending on whether the parties have chosen a C 
Incoterms® rule or an F Incoterms® rule), there are situations 
where no such independent third party is engaged at all 
because the seller or the buyer itself will carry the goods sold. 
This is more likely to happen in the D rules (DAP, DPU and 
DDP), where the seller may use its own means of transport  
to carry the goods to the buyer at the delivery destination. 
Provision has therefore been made in the Incoterms® 2020 rules 
for a seller under the D rules either to contract for carriage  
or to arrange for carriage, that is to say through its own means 
of transport: see A4. 
31. The question asked at paragraph 29 above is not simply a 
“carriage” question: it is an important “sale” question. The 
question is not which carrier can a seller or buyer of goods 
damaged in transit sue under the contract of carriage. The 
“sale” question is: where there is more than one carrier involved 
in the carriage of the goods from seller to buyer, at which point 
in the carriage string does the handing over of the goods mark 
the point of delivery and the transfer of risk as between seller 
and buyer? 
32. There needs to be a simple answer to this question because the 
relationships between the multiple carriers used, and between 
the seller and/or the buyer with those several carriers, will be 
complex, depending as they do on the terms of a number of 
separate contracts of carriage. Thus, for example, in any such 
chain of contracts of carriage, one carrier, such as a carrier 
actually performing a leg of the transit by road, may well act  
as the seller’s agent in concluding a contract of carriage with  
a carrier by sea. 
33. The Incoterms® 2020 rules give a clear answer to this question 
where the parties contract on FCA. In FCA, the relevant carrier 
is the carrier nominated by the buyer to whom the seller hands 
over the goods at the place or point agreed in the contract of 
sale. Thus even if a seller engages a road haulier to take the 
goods to the agreed delivery point, risk would transfer not at 
the place and time where the seller hands the goods over to 
the haulier engaged by the seller, but at the place and time 
where the goods are placed at the disposal of the carrier 
engaged by the buyer. This is why the naming of the place or 
point of delivery as precisely as possible is so important in FCA 
sales. The same situation can arise in FOB if a seller engages a 
feeder vessel or barge to take the goods to the vessel engaged 
by the buyer. A similar answer is provided by Incoterms® 2020: 
delivery occurs when the goods are placed on board the 
buyer’s carrier. 
34. With the C rules, the position is more complex and may well 
attract different solutions under different legal systems. In CPT 
and CIP, the relevant carrier is likely to be regarded, at any rate 
in some jurisdictions, as the first carrier to whom the seller 
INCOTERMS® 2020
8 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
hands over the goods under A2 (unless the parties have agreed 
on the point of delivery). The buyer knows nothing of the 
contractual arrangements made between the seller and the 
first or subsequent carriers, or indeed between that first carrier 
and subsequent carriers. What the buyer does know, however, 
is that the goods are “in transit” to him or her—and that 
“transit” starts as far as the buyer knows, when the goods are 
put by the seller into the hands of the first carrier. The conse-
quence is that risk transfers from seller to buyer at that early 
stage of “delivery” to the first carrier. The same situation can 
arise in CFR and CIF if a seller engages a feeder vessel or barge 
to take the goods to the agreed port of shipment, if any. A 
similar answer might be suggested in some legal systems: 
delivery occurs when the goods are placed on board the vessel 
at the agreed port of shipment, if any. 
35. Such a conclusion, if adopted, may seem harsh on the buyer. 
Risk would transfer from seller to buyer in CPT and CIP sales 
when the goods are handed over to the first carrier. The buyer 
does not know at that stage whether or not that first carrier is 
responsible for loss of or damage to the goods under the 
relevant carriage contract. The buyer is not a party to that 
contract, has no control over it and will not know its terms.  
Yet, despite this, the buyer would end up bearing the risk in the 
goods from the very earliest moment of handing over, possibly 
without recovery against that first carrier. 
36. While the buyer would end up bearing the risk of loss of or 
damage to the goods at an early stage of the transport chain,  
it would, on this view however, have a remedy against the 
seller. A2/A3 do not operate in a vacuum: under A4, the seller 
must contract for the carriage of the goods “from the agreed 
point of delivery, if any, at the place of delivery to the named 
place of destination or, if agreed, any point at that place.” Even 
if risk has transferred to the buyer at the time the goods were 
handed over to the first carrier under A2/A3, if that first carrier 
does not undertake responsibility under its contract of carriage 
for the through carriage of the goods to the named destina-
tion, the seller, on this view, would remain liable to the buyer 
under A4. In essence, the seller should make a contract of 
carriage to the destination named under the contract of sale. 
 
VI. RULES FOR THE CONTRACT OF SALE AND THEIR 
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CONTRACTS
37. This discussion of the role of the carrier in the delivery of the 
goods as between the seller and the buyer in the C and F 
Incoterms® rules raises the question: what role do the 
 Incoterms® rules play in the contract of carriage, or, indeed,  
in any of the other contracts typically surrounding an export 
contract, for example an insurance contract or a letter 
of credit? 
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 9
38. The short answer is that the Incoterms® rules do not form part 
of those other contracts: where incorporated, the Incoterms® 
rules apply to and govern only certain aspects of the contract 
of sale. 
39. This is not the same as saying, however, that the Incoterms® 
rules have no impact on those other contracts. Goods are 
exported and imported through a network of contracts that,  
in an ideal world, should match the one with the other. Thus, 
the sale contract, for example, will require the tender of a 
transport document issued by the carrier to the seller/shipper 
under a contract of carriage and against which the seller/
shipper/beneficiary might wish to be paid under a letter of 
credit. Where the three contracts match, things go well; where 
they do not, problems rapidly arise. 
40. What the Incoterms® rules say, for example, about carriage or 
transport documents (in A4/B4 and A6/B6), or what they say 
about insurance cover (A5/B5), does not bind the carrier or 
the insurer or any of the banks involved. Thus, a carrier is only 
bound to issue a transport document as required by the 
contract of carriage it makes with the other party to that 
contract: it is not bound to issue a transport document com-
plying with the Incoterms® rules. Likewise, an insurer is bound 
to issue a policy to the level and in the terms agreed with the 
party purchasing the insurance, not a policy which complies 
with the Incoterms® rules. Finally, a bank will look only at the 
documentary requirements in the letter of credit, if any, not at 
the requirements of the sales contract.
41. However, it is very much in the interests of all the parties to the 
different contracts in the network to ensure that the carriage  
or insurance terms they have agreed with the carrier or insurer, 
or the terms of a letter of credit, comply with what the sale 
contract says about ancillary contracts that need to be made 
or documents that need to be obtained and tendered. That 
task does not fall on the carrier, the insurer or the bank, none  
of whom are party to the contract of sale and none of whom 
are, therefore, party to or bound by the Incoterms® 2020 rules. 
It is, however, in the seller’s and buyer’s interest to try to ensure 
that the different parts of the network of contracts match—and 
the starting point is the sale contract—and therefore, where 
they apply, the Incoterms® 2020 rules. 
 VII. THE ELEVEN INCOTERMS® 2020 RULES—“SEA 
AND INLAND WATERWAY” AND “ANY MODE(S) OF 
TRANSPORT”: GETTING IT RIGHT
42. The main distinction introduced in the Incoterms® 2010 rules, 
that between Rules for any Mode or Modes of Transport 
(comprising EXW, FCA, CPT, CIP, DAP, the newly named 
INCOTERMS® 2020
10 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
DPU—the old DAT—and DDP), and Rules for Sea and Inland 
Waterway Transport, (comprising FAS, FOB, CFR and CIF)  
has been retained. 
43. The four so-called “maritime” Incoterms® rules are intended for 
use where the seller places the goods on board (or in FAS 
alongside) a vessel at a sea or river port. It is at this point that 
the seller delivers the goods to the buyer. When these rules are 
used, the risk of loss of or damage to those goods is on the 
buyer’s shoulders from that port. 
44. The seven Incoterms® rules for any mode or modes of transport 
(so-called “multi-modal”), on the other hand, are intended for 
use where
a) the point at which the seller hands the goods over to,  
or places them at the disposal of, a carrier, or 
b) the point at which the carrier hands the goods over to the 
buyer, or the point at which they are placed at the disposal 
of the buyer, or
c) both points (a) and (b) 
are not on board (or in FAS alongside) a vessel. 
45. Where delivery happens and risk transfers in each of these 
seven Incoterms® rules will depend on which particular rule is 
used. For example, in CPT, delivery happens at the seller’s end 
when the goods are handed over to the carrier contracted by 
the seller. In DAP, on the other hand, delivery happens when 
the goods are placed at the buyer’s disposal at the named 
place or point of destination.
46. The order in which the Incoterms® 2010 rules were presented 
has, as we have said, been largely retained in Incoterms® 2020 
and it is important to underline the distinction between the two 
families of Incoterms® rules so that the right rule is used for the 
contract of sale depending on the means of transport used. 
47. One of the most frequent problems in the use of the Incoterms® 
rules is the choice of the wrong rule for the particular type 
of contract. 
48. Thus, for example, an FOB inland point (for example an airport 
or a warehouse) sale contract makes little sense: what type of 
contract of carriage must the buyer make? Does the buyer owe 
the seller an obligation to make a contract of carriage under 
which the carrier is bound to take over the goods at the named 
inland point or at the nearest port to that point? 
49. Again, a CIF named sea port sale contract where the buyer 
expects the goods to be brought to an inland point in the 
buyer’s country makes little sense. Must the seller procure a 
contract of carriage and insurance cover to the eventual inland 
destination intended by the parties or to the seaport named in 
the sale contract? 
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 11
50. Gaps, overlaps and unnecessary costs are likely to arise—and all 
this because the wrong Incoterms® rule has been chosen for 
the particular contract. What makes the mismatch “wrong” is 
that insufficient regard has been given to the two most 
important features of the Incoterms® rules, features which are 
mirrors of each other, namely the port, place or point of 
delivery and the transfer of risks. 
51. The reason for the frequent misuse of the wrong Incoterms® 
rule is that Incoterms® rules are frequently regarded exclusively 
as price indicators: this or that is the EXW, FOB, or DAP price. 
The initials used in the Incoterms® rules are doubtless handy 
abbreviations for the formula used in the calculation of the 
price. Incoterms® rules are not, however, exclusively, or even 
primarily, price indicators. They are a list of general obligations 
that sellers and buyers owe each other under well-recognised 
forms of sale contract—and one of their main tasks is to 
indicate the port, place or point of delivery where the risk 
is transferred. 
 VIII. ORDER WITHIN THE INCOTERMS® 2020 RULES
52. All the ten A/B articles in each of the Incoterms® rules are 
important—but some are more important than others. 
53. There has, indeed, been a radical shake-up in the internal order 
in which the ten articles within each Incoterms® rule have been 
organised. In Incoterms® 2020, the internal order within each 
Incoterms® rule now follows this sequence:
A1/B1 
General obligations
A2/B2 
Delivery/Taking delivery
A3/B3 
Transfer of risks 
A4/B4 
Carriage
A5/B5 
Insurance
A6/B6 
Delivery/transport document
A7/B7 
Export/import clearance
A8/B8 
Checking/packaging/marking
A9/B9 
Allocation of costs
A10/B10 Notices
54. It will be noticed that concerning the Incoterms® 2020 rules, 
after recording in A1/B1 the basic goods/payment obligations 
of the parties, Delivery and the Transfer of risks are moved to a 
more prominent location, namely to A2 and A3 respectively.
55. The broad sequence thereafter goes: 
``
ancillary contracts (A4/B4 and A5/B5, carriage and 
insurance); 
``
transport documents (A6/B6); 
INCOTERMS® 2020
12 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
``
export/import clearance (A7/B7); 
``
packaging (A8/B8); 
``
costs (A9/B9); and 
``
notices (A10/B10).
56. It is appreciated that this change in the order of the A/B 
articles will take some time—and cost—to become familiar. It is 
hoped that with delivery and risk now made more prominent, 
traders will find it easier to identify the differences among the 
various Incoterms® rules, i.e. the different points in time and 
place at which the seller “delivers” the goods to the buyer with 
risk transferring to the buyer from that time and point.
57. For the first time, the Incoterms® rules are published both in the 
traditional format setting out the eleven Incoterms® rules and  
in a new “horizontal” format setting out the ten articles within 
each Incoterms® rule under each of the headings listed above  
in paragraph 53, first for the seller and then for the buyer. 
Traders can therefore now far more easily see the difference, 
for example, between the place of delivery in FCA and the 
place of delivery in DAP; or the items of cost which fall on  
a buyer in CIF when compared with the items of cost which  
fall on a buyer in CFR. It is hoped that this “horizontal” rep-
resentation of the Incoterms® 2020 rules will further assist 
traders in choosing the Incoterms® rule most appropriate to 
their commercial requirements. 
 
IX. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN INCOTERMS® 2010 AND 2020
58. The most important initiative behind the Incoterms® 2020 rules 
has been to focus on how the presentation could be enhanced 
to steer users towards the right Incoterms® rule for their sale 
contract. Thus:
a) a greater emphasis in this Introduction on making the right 
choice; 
b) a clearer explanation of the demarcation and connection 
between the sale contract and its ancillary contracts; 
c) upgraded Guidance Notes presented now as Explanatory 
Notes to each Incoterms® rule; and
d) a re-ordering within the Incoterms® rules giving delivery  
and risk more prominence.
All these changes, though cosmetic in appearance, are in 
reality substantial attempts on the part of ICC to assist the 
international trading community towards smoother export/
import transactions.
59. Apart from these general changes, there are more substantive 
changes in the Incoterms® 2020 rules when compared with 
Incoterms® 2010. Before looking at those changes, mention 
must be made of a particular development in trade practice 
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 13
which occurred since 2010 and which ICC has decided should 
not lead to a change in the Incoterms® 2020 rules, namely 
Verified Gross Mass (VGM).
60. Note on Verified Gross Mass (VGM)—Since 1 July 2016, 
Regulation 2 under the International Convention for the Safety 
of Life at Sea (SOLAS) imposed on shippers in the case of the 
shipment of containers the obligation either to weigh the 
packed container using calibrated and certified equipment,  
or to weigh the contents of the container and add the weight 
of the container when empty. In either case, the VGM is to be 
recorded with the carrier. A failure to comply bears the 
sanction under the SOLAS Convention that the container 
“should not be loaded onto a ship”: see paragraph 4.2,  
MSC1/Circ.1475, 9 June 2014.
These weighing operations obviously incur expense and failure 
may lead to delay in loading. As this happened after 2010, it is 
unsurprising that there was some pressure in the consultations 
leading to Incoterms® 2020 for a clear indication to be given as 
to who, as between seller and buyer, should bear such 
obligations. 
61. It was felt by the Drafting Group that obligations and costs 
relating to VGM were too specific and complex to warrant 
explicit mention in the Incoterms® 2020 rules.
62. Returning to the changes made by ICC to the Incoterms® 2010 
rules in the Incoterms® 2020 rules, these are: 
[a] Bills of lading with an on-board notation and the FCA 
Incoterms® rule
[b] Costs, where they are listed
[c] Different levels of insurance cover in CIF and CIP 
[d] Arranging for carriage with seller’s or buyer’s own 
means of transport in FCA, DAP, DPU and DDP
[e] Change in the three-letter initials for DAT to DPU
[f] 
Inclusion of security-related requirements within 
carriage obligations and costs
[g] Explanatory Notes for Users
[a] Bills of lading with an on-board notation and the FCA 
Incoterms® rule
63. Where goods are sold FCA for carriage by sea, sellers or 
buyers (or more likely their banks where a letter of credit is in 
place) might want a bill of lading with an on-board notation.
64. However, delivery under the FCA rule is completed before the 
loading of the goods on board the vessel. It is by no means 
certain that the seller can obtain an on-board bill of lading from 
the carrier. That carrier is likely, under its contract of carriage, 
to be bound and entitled to issue an on-board bill of lading 
only once the goods are actually on board.
INCOTERMS® 2020
14 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
65. To cater for this situation, FCA A6/B6 of Incoterms® 2020 now 
provides for an additional option. The buyer and the seller can 
agree that the buyer will instruct its carrier to issue an on-board 
bill of lading to the seller after the loading of the goods, the 
seller then being obliged to tender that bill of lading to the 
buyer, typically through the banks. ICC recognises that, despite 
this somewhat unhappy union between an on-board bill of 
lading and FCA delivery, this caters for a demonstrated need  
in the marketplace. Finally, it should be emphasised that even 
where this optional mechanism is adopted, the seller is under 
no obligation to the buyer as to the terms of the contract 
of carriage.
66. Does it remain true to say that where containerised goods are 
delivered by seller to buyer by handing over to a carrier before 
loading onto a ship, the seller is well advised to sell on FCA 
terms rather than on FOB terms? The answer to that question 
is Yes. Where Incoterms® 2020 have made a difference, 
however, is that where such a seller still wants or needs a bill  
of lading with an on-board notation, the new additional option 
in the FCA term A6/B6 makes provision for such a document.
[b] Costs, where they are listed
67. In the new ordering of the articles within the Incoterms® 2020 
rules, costs now appear at A9/B9 of each Incoterms® rule. 
Apart from that re-location, however, there is another change 
that will become obvious to users early on. The various costs 
which fall to be allocated by various articles within the Inco-
terms® rules have traditionally appeared in different parts of 
each Incoterms® rule. Thus, for example, costs related to the 
obtaining of a delivery document in FOB 2010 were mentioned 
in A8, the article under the heading “Delivery Document”, but 
not in A6, the article under the heading “Allocation of Costs”. 
68. In the Incoterms® 2020 rules, however, the equivalent of A6/B6, 
namely A9/B9, now lists all the costs allocated by each 
particular Incoterms® rule. A9/B9 in the Incoterms® 2020 rules 
are consequently longer than A6/B6 in the Incoterms® 
2010 rules. 
69. The purpose is to provide users with a one-stop list of costs,  
so that the seller or buyer can now find in one place all the 
costs for which it would be responsible under that particular 
 Incoterms® rule. Items of cost are also mentioned in their home 
article: thus, for example, the costs involved in obtaining 
documents in FOB still also appear at A6/B6 as well as at  
A9/B9. The thinking here was that users interested in 
discovering the specific allocation of documentary costs  
might be more inclined to go to the specific article dealing  
with delivery documents rather than to the general article 
listing all the costs. 
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 15
[c] Different levels of insurance cover in CIF and CIP 
70. In the Incoterms® 2010 rules, A3 of both CIF and CIP imposed 
on the seller the obligation to “obtain at its own expense cargo 
insurance complying at least with the minimum cover as 
provided by Clauses (C) of the Institute Cargo Clauses (Lloyd’s 
Market Association/International Underwriting Association 
‘LMA/IUA’) or any similar clauses.” Institute Cargo Clauses (C) 
provide cover for a number of listed risks, subject to itemised 
exclusions; Institute Cargo Clauses (A), on the other hand, 
cover “all risks”, again subject to itemised exclusions. During 
the consultations leading to the Incoterms® 2020 rules, the case 
was made for moving from Institute Cargo Clauses (C) to 
Institute Cargo Clauses (A), thus increasing the cover obtained 
by the seller for the benefit of the buyer. This could, of course, 
also involve an additional cost in premium. The contrary case, 
namely to stay with Institute Cargo Clauses (C), was equally 
strongly put, particularly by those involved in the maritime 
trade of commodities. After considerable discussion within and 
beyond the Drafting Group, the decision was made to provide 
for different minimum cover in the CIF Incoterms® rule and in 
the CIP Incoterms® rule. In the first, which is much more likely 
to be used in the maritime commodity trades, the status quo 
has been retained, with Institute Cargo Clauses (C) as the 
default position, although it is, of course, open to the parties to 
agree to higher cover. In the second, namely the CIP Incoterms® 
rule, the seller must now obtain insurance cover complying 
with Institute Cargo Clauses (A), although it is, of course, again 
open to the parties to agree on a lower level of cover.
[d] Arranging for carriage with seller’s or buyer’s own means  
of transport in FCA, DAP, DPU and DDP
71. In the Incoterms® 2010 rules, it was assumed throughout that 
where the goods were to be carried from the seller to the 
buyer, they would be carried by a third-party carrier engaged 
for the purpose either by the seller or the buyer, depending  
on which Incoterms® rule was used.
72. It became clear in the deliberations leading to Incoterms® 2020, 
however, that there were some situations where, although the 
goods were to be carried from the seller to the buyer, they 
could be so carried without any third-party carrier being 
engaged at all. Thus, for example, there was nothing stopping 
a seller on a D rule from arranging for such carriage without 
outsourcing that function to a third party, namely by using its 
own means of transportation. Likewise, with an FCA purchase, 
there was nothing to stop the buyer from using its own vehicle 
for the collection of the goods and for their transport to the 
buyer’s premises. 
INCOTERMS® 2020
16 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)
73. The rules appeared not to take account of these eventualities. 
The Incoterms® 2020 rules now do, by expressly allowing not 
only for the making of a contract of carriage, but also for 
simply arranging for the necessary carriage.
[e] Change in the three-letter initials for DAT to DPU
74. The only difference between DAT and DAP in the Incoterms® 
2010 rules was that in DAT the seller delivered the goods once 
unloaded from the arriving means of transport into a “terminal”; 
whereas in DAP, the seller delivered the goods when the goods 
were placed at the disposal of the buyer on the arriving means 
of transport for unloading. It will also be recalled that the 
Guidance Note for DAT in Incoterms® 2010 defined the word 
“terminal” broadly to include “any place, whether covered 
or not…”. 
75. ICC decided to make two changes to DAT and DAP. First, the 
order in which the two Incoterms® 2020 rules are presented  
has been inverted, and DAP, where delivery happens before 
unloading, now appears before DAT. Secondly, the name  
of the rule DAT has been changed to DPU (Delivered at Place 
Unloaded), emphasising the reality that the place of destination 
could be any place and not only a “terminal”. However, if that 
place is not in a terminal, the seller should make sure that the 
place where it intends to deliver the goods is a place where it is 
able to unload the goods.
[f] Inclusion of security-related requirements within carriage 
obligations and costs
76. It will be recalled that security-related requirements made a 
rather subdued entry into the Incoterms® 2010 rules, through 
A2/B2 and A10/B10 in each rule. The Incoterms® 2010 rules 
were the first revision of the Incoterms® rules to come into force 
after security-related concerns became so prevalent in the 
early part of this century. Those concerns, and the associated 
shipping practices which they have created in their wake, are 
now much more established. Connected as they are to carriage 
requirements, an express allocation of security-related 
obligations has now been added to A4 and A7 of each 
Incoterms® rule. The costs incurred by these requirements are 
also now given a more prominent position in the costs article, 
namely A9/B9. 
[g] Explanatory Notes for Users
77. The Guidance Notes appearing at the start of each Incoterms® 
rule in the 2010 version now appear as “Explanatory Notes for 
Users”. These Notes explain the fundamentals of each 
 Incoterms® 2020 rule, such as when it should be used, when 
risk transfers and how costs are allocated between seller and 
buyer. The Explanatory Notes are intended (a) to help the 
user accurately and efficiently steer towards the appropriate 
INCOTERMS® 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) | 17
Incoterms® rule for a particular transaction; and (b) to provide 
those deciding or advising on disputes or contracts governed 
by Incoterms® 2020 with guidance on matters which might 
require interpretation. For guidance on more fundamental 
issues that cut across the Incoterms® 2020 rules more gener-
ally, reference may, of course, also be made to the text of 
this Introduction.
 
X. CAUTION WITH VARIANTS OF INCOTERMS® RULES
78. Sometimes the parties want to alter an Incoterms® rule. The 
Incoterms® 2020 rules do not prohibit such alteration, but 
there are dangers in so doing. In order to avoid any unwel-
come surprises, the parties would need to make the intended 
effect of such alterations extremely clear in their contract. 
Thus, for example, if the allocation of costs in the Incoterms® 
2020 rules is altered in the contract, the parties should also 
clearly state whether they intend to vary the point at which 
delivery is made and the risk transfers to the buyer. 
Charles Debattista* 
Special ICC Advisor  
Incoterms® 2020 Drafting Group
36 Stone 
Gray’s Inn 
London
* 
I am very grateful for comments received on earlier drafts of this personal 
Introduction to the new rules, both from ICC national committees and from my 
colleagues on the Drafting Group. The views expressed in this Introduction, 
however, remain my own and do not therefore form part of the Incoterms® 2020 
rules themselves.
