INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
Frequently Asked Questions 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
June 19 2020 
Page 1 of 1 
 
This document of FAQs serves as a brief introduction to intellectual property rights. It is intended to provide a 
short introduction to the basics. Any specific questions should be referred to MANE's Legal and IP Department. 
 
1. 
What is intellectual property? 
Intellectual property (IP) refers to creations of the mind, such as inventions; literary and artistic works; designs; 
and symbols, names and images used in commerce. 
 
IP is protected in specific laws, which enable people to earn recognition or financial benefit from what they invent 
or create. By striking the right balance between the interests of innovators and the wider public interest, the IP 
system aims to foster an environment in which creativity and innovation can flourish. 
 
2. 
What are the common types of IP? 
PATENTS 
REGISTERED DESIGNS (or Design Patent) 
TRADEMARKS 
COPYRIGHTS 
TRADE SECRETS 
 
3. 
What is a patent? 
A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or a process that provides, in general, 
a new product or way of doing something, or offers a new technical solution to a technical problem. 
 
Patents protect the features and processes that make things work. Patent rights let inventors profit from their 
inventions. 
 
Patent protection means an invention cannot be commercially made, used, distributed or sold without the patent 
owner’s consent.  Patent rights are usually enforced in courts that, in most systems, hold the authority to stop 
patent infringement. Conversely, a court can also declare a patent invalid upon a successful challenge by a third 
party. 
 
4. 
What is a trademark? 
A trademark is a distinctive sign or mark, which identifies certain goods or services as those produced or provided 
by a specific person or enterprise. 
 
5. 
What can be registered as a trademark? 
Words; Logos; Slogans; Sounds; Colors; Shapes; Smells. 
 
6. 
What is a Registered Design? 
A design is the ornamental or aesthetic aspect of an article. The design may consist of three-dimensional 
features, such as the shape or surface of an article, or of two-dimensional features, such as patterns, lines or 
color. 
 
7. 
What is copyright? 
Copyright is the set of exclusive rights granted to the creator of an original work (e.g. a piece of music, song 
lyrics, films, novels, photographs, paintings, web pages) including the right to copy, distribute and adapt the 
work. Like all of the other IP rights, these rights can be licensed, transferred and/or assigned. 
 
8. 
What is an intellectual property licensing agreement? 
A licensing agreement involves the transfer of intellectual property rights, and potentially proprietary knowledge, 
in return for royalty as revenue from one company or individual to another. 
 
 
 
