MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 1 of 10 
 
 
 
 
OBJECTIVE:   
 
The intent of this policy is to provide clear and consistent instructions regarding 
acceptable steps and measures for creating a permanent and legally-sufficient record of 
research and development activities by MANE group employees, contractors, interns, 
externs, or other persons conducting research related activities on behalf of the MANE 
group. 
 
SCOPE OF APPLICATION:  
 
This policy specifically governs acceptable practices relating to creation and retention of 
all research and development records at MANE's R&D/Innovation Centers worldwide.  
This policy, which is based on and consistent with Procedure ITG-DS-001/08 of           
V. MANE FILS, applies to all MANE employees, trainees, or any other persons having a 
contractual obligation to assign or license intellectual property rights to any direct or 
indirect affiliate of V. MANE FILS.  
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS: 
 
1. 
Laboratory Notebook .............................................................................................................. 2 
1.1.  Objectives ........................................................................................................................ 2 
1.2.  Model and storage ........................................................................................................... 3 
1.3.  Attribution and classification .......................................................................................... 3 
1.4.  Property and confidentiality ............................................................................................ 4 
 
2. 
Instructions for Recording Information ................................................................................... 4 
2.1.  General Rules Regarding Form ....................................................................................... 5 
2.2.  General Rules Regarding Substance ............................................................................... 6 
2.3.  Required Duties of Author and Witness .......................................................................... 7 
 
3. 
Certification ............................................................................................................................. 8 
 
4. 
Archiving ................................................................................................................................. 8 
 
Appendix:  Laboratory Recordkeeping Procedure (per manufacturer) ........................................ 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 2 of 10 
 
1. Laboratory Notebook 
 
1.1. Functions and objectives 
 
Research and development (R&D) refers to innovative activities toward developing new 
products, processes, or equipment, or improvements in existing products, processes, or 
equipment.  To that end, all R&D work involving new products, processes, equipment, or 
modification of existing products, processes, or equipment must be evaluated to assess 
novelty and obviousness (inventive step).  All Mane researchers, engineers, technicians, 
trainees, interns, in charge of product or production process development work shall utilize a 
company-issued laboratory notebook to record any R&D work that foreseeably involves the 
creation of new, nonobvious, and commercially relevant products, processes, or equipment.  
 
The primary purpose of a laboratory notebook is to preserve and protect intellectual 
property rights in all new and improved products, processes, or equipment by serving as a 
record and archive for all research and development work (ideas, experiments, formulations, 
etc.).  A laboratory notebook, when properly utilized, may be used as legal evidence with 
respect to various aspects of the new or improved methods/products, such as conception 
and/or reduction to practice of an invention and date(s) corresponding thereto, test results, 
and the like.   
 
In this respect, laboratory notebooks enable inventors: 
 To record and provide an accounting of the intellectual and technical progress 
corresponding to each project carried out; 
 To explain the manner in which an experiment was carried out and how the result(s) 
of that experiment was obtained, and thus serve as the definitive account of what 
transpired, which thereby ensures the reproducibility of the experiment; and 
 To ensure the preservation of information which may be useful for both internal and 
external 
communications 
(e.g., 
writing 
scientific 
publications, 
preparing 
presentations, drafting of patent applications, transfer of technology, etc.). 
 
By following the steps prescribed herein for their implementation, MANE laboratory 
notebooks will possess the authenticity to serve as evidentiary tools in the event of 
litigation(s), dispute(s), or claim(s).  Proper implementation of the prescribed procedure will 
create laboratory notebooks that can be used: 
 To certify that, on a specified date, the holder possessed the information contained 
therein (e.g., experimental results, scientific observation, working hypotheses, etc.); 
 To specifically define the information created by the holder, such as working 
hypothesis, reflections, experimental designs and results, which may assist with 
determining inventorship, establishing invention rights, and providing data for patent 
filings; and 
 To provide a factual accounting toward the degree of participation (e.g., intellectual 
and material contribution) of an individual and/or a company in the design of an 
invention. 
 
Accordingly, a properly documented laboratory notebook makes it possible to capitalize 
on the knowledge and know-how of researchers / laboratories / companies.  As such, they are 
an essential component of the heritage of V. MANE FILS, and the rest of the MANE Group. 
 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 3 of 10 
 
1.2. Model and storage 
 
The approved laboratory notebook model should be sewn and hardbound, and 
substantially identical for all personnel at a given site.  One suitable example of an approved 
laboratory notebook is Boorum & Pease Record Book, Record Ruled, 10-3/8" x 8-1/8" Size, 
300 Pages (21-300-R) or its equivalent.  Each laboratory notebook shall have a unique 
alphanumerical identifier assigned (further discussed below), either embossed on the exterior 
covering or marked in permanent ink on the interior cover.   
 
A supply of laboratory books should be maintained by the Director or Vice President 
(VP) of R&D of the respective R&D/Innovation site.  Each person(s) assigned to a given 
notebook is responsible for the safekeeping, maintenance, and archiving thereof. 
 
1.3. Attribution and classification 
 
The VP of R&D or Director of the Mane R&D/Innovation site is responsible for creating 
and maintaining a Laboratory Notebook Log for recording the assignment of laboratory 
notebooks to personnel.  The assignment of each laboratory notebook is entered into the 
Laboratory Notebook Log by associating the laboratory notebook's unique alphanumerical 
identifier with at least one individual, who is responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping. 
 
A laboratory notebook's unique alphanumerical identifier shall comprise a mixture of 
letters and numbers.  Letters are used to designate the MANE group company (e.g., MINC 
for Mane, Inc. in USA; MSEA for Mane Sea in Singapore; KCOR for KANCOR 
INGREDIENTS LIMITED in India etc…).  For the numerical portion of the identifier, at 
least three digits should correspond to the sequence number of opening of the laboratory 
notebook, and two digits corresponding to the year of assignment should be set apart from the 
previous digits with a forward slash (/) (ex: MUSA-001/17, MMEX-014/17, PTMI-008/17, 
etc.). 
 
The unique alphanumerical identifier may be embossed on the notebook's exterior and/or 
recorded in permanent ink inside the front cover.  Further, this unique alphanumerical 
identifier should be entered on the first page of experiments, and on all subsequent pages that 
begin a new program, a new test, new experiment, etc. 
 
On the inside cover of the laboratory notebook, the following information must be 
entered: 
 The exact (legal entity) Company Name (e.g., PT MANE INDONESIA). 
 The section (department) information (e.g., Flavors, Applications, etc.). 
 The control number (i.e., the unique identifier assigned to that book). 
 The name of the person to whom the laboratory notebook has been assigned. 
 Signature of the person, which acknowledges the receipt thereof. 
 The date of issuance. 
 The date of the last entry. 
 The control number of the previously used laboratory notebook, if applicable. 
 The control number of the next used laboratory notebook, if applicable. 
 The name of the person who assigned the notebook. 
 The total number of pages of data entered. 
 
 
Additionally, inside the front and back covers shall be placed a stamp specifying the 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 4 of 10 
 
ownership of the laboratory notebook, by specifically identifying the name of the MANE 
group subsidiary/affiliate and its contact information (e.g., address, telephone and fax 
numbers). 
 
Note 1: Example:  
 
This laboratory notebook is the exclusive property of the company: 
Mane, Inc., a subsidiary of V. MANE FILS, located at: 
2501 Henkle Drive 
Lebanon, OH 45036 
PH: 513-248-9876 
FAX: 513-248-8808 
 
Note 2: While it is permissible to allot a single laboratory notebook to more than one 
person (e.g., a team or department), this practice should be reserved only for temporary 
workers, such as interns or trainees.  If necessary, at the time of the opening of this lab 
notebook, one person (e.g., a supervisor) is designated as the assignee, where the first 
page is filled out with information which corresponds to this person.  Each contributor 
(intern or trainee) making entries into the laboratory notebook must be identified.  A 
listing of the contributors, along with their respective handwritten signatures, needs to be 
prepared on the page following the LABORATORY RECORDKEEPING PROCEDURES 
near the front of the laboratory notebook. 
 
The operating instructions for making entries into the laboratory notebook, which are 
printed at the beginning pages of the laboratory notebook, as well as reproduced at the end of 
this policy, must be known to every contributor writing entries into a laboratory notebook.  
By signing, each contributor to the laboratory notebook attests to having read these 
instructions, and agrees to comply with the rules and principles defined therein. 
 
1.4. Property and confidentiality 
 
The laboratory notebooks and their contents remain, in all circumstances, the exclusive 
property of the MANE group.  The laboratory notebooks and their content are subjected to an 
obligation of confidentiality and cannot be disclosed to a third without express authorization 
of an authorized representative of MANE General Management. 
 
Until the return of the laboratory notebook to the VP of R&D (or Director) for archiving 
or filing, the duty of preserving the integrity of the laboratory notebooks remains with the 
laboratory notebook assignee.  The originally-assigned holder of a notebook will be able to 
maintain possession of their laboratory notebooks as a long time as there is a need, but no 
longer than 3 years from the date of last entry.  In the event of termination of employment, 
the laboratory notebook assignee shall immediately surrender each laboratory notebook in 
his/her possession to his/her supervisor, the VP of R&D, or Director, who will assume 
responsibility for archiving the surrendered notebook(s). 
 
2. Instructions for Recording Information 
 
Generally speaking, the person performing the research and development activity records 
his/her work progressively in the assigned laboratory notebook (work hypotheses, methods 
and means used, results obtained, conclusions drawn…), in a sufficiently complete, clear and 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 5 of 10 
 
precise way to enable allow a person having ordinary skill in the relevant art, to reproduce 
recorded work and to obtain at least similar results. 
 
2.1. General Rules Regarding Form 
 
 Preferably, the language of the laboratory notebook is English, but French or 
Spanish may be acceptable alternatives depending on the location of the Mane 
Innovation center. 
 The information is recorded directly in the laboratory booklet, dated (using two 
digits for the day, at least three letters to uniquely identify the month, and four 
digits for the year, e.g., 20 MAY 2017 or 05 NOV 2017), and referenced with its 
company project name or number and/or an internal reference specific to the 
researcher. 
 The recording of handwritten information is done directly and only on the printed 
lines of the pages of the notebook, respecting the full width of the pages. 
 The insertion of information near the internal margin is to be avoided, as 
information may be difficult to capture accurately during scanning. 
 
Note 3: If the need for a later entry or amendment arises, it is advisable to use unmarked 
section of the page immediately below, and particularly point out the passage(s) 
concerned. Where no such unmarked section is available, one should make the 
entry/amendment on a subsequent page, and record the subsequent page number on the 
instant page.  An arrow, asterisk, etc. can be used to precisely identify the section being 
amended or corrected. 
 
 
Recording data can also be carried out by means of inserting preprinted information in the 
notebook (for example, typed reports, diagrams, diagrams, output datum of equipment of 
analysis, photographs, etc.).  The preprinted information should not exceed the dimensions of 
the page, nor cover any information already entered on the page. Transparent tape or other 
adhesive should be utilized to affix the inserted information to the page surface. 
 
 
For two successive inserts, the second must be affixed below the other (or on two 
successive pages) and not side by side.  Each taped or glued insert must be signed and dated 
by both the writer and the witness (each signature should traverse at least one of the seams 
between the insert and the support page).  Other than the aforementioned dates and 
signatures, no other handwritten annotations on the insert are permitted.   
 
Note 4: If there is a need to annotate information on an insert (e.g., for reasons of 
clarity), the "original" preprinted copy must be annotated first and then photocopied; the 
corresponding photocopy is then adhered to the surface of the notebook page. 
 
Note 5: It is not necessary to integrate every piece of data in the laboratory notebook. 
For example, if the data set is too large, the writer can also create alternative archives 
for the data (e.g., an electronic database of HPLC chromatographs), and simply 
reference the corresponding file number. 
 
Note 6: Rather than the original of an experimental material, a photograph or a digitized 
reproduction may be used, such as in the case of a thin-layer chromatography plate, a 
gel, a membrane, an autoradiography, or a thermosensitive ticket. 
 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 6 of 10 
 
Significant blank spaces between two information entries (for example, successions of 
blank lines, page breaks, pages left blank) or to the right of an insert, must be crossed out by 
means of a "Z", so that no information may be subsequently added.  The removal of any 
laboratory notebook page is strictly prohibited, as doing so may jeopardize the integrity of the 
entire notebook. 
 
All handwritten entries shall be made using permanent ink.  There is no restriction on the 
choice of ink colors to be used, provided that the recorded information remains fully legible 
and comprehensible in full, after black and white reproduction using a standard photocopier.  
Black or dark blue inks are recommended.  The use of erasable ink, pencil, or "white 
correction fluid" is not allowed.  The texts and entries must be legible (any erasure must be 
referred to and dated, both by the editor and the witness). 
 
Any coding of information using specific colors should be avoided.  If the use of colors 
cannot be avoided, the selection of colors and/or textures must be made with careful 
consideration of a possible need for subsequent reproduction using a standard photocopier in 
black and white. 
 
On each page containing an entry, the name of the project and laboratory notebook 
number must be entered in the designated location at the top of the page. 
 
2.2. General Rules Regarding Substance 
 
Each test, experiment, or analysis, whether positive or negative, must be recorded in the 
laboratory record.  Care should be taken to ensure that the following elements are clearly and 
precisely stated: 
 
 The context in which the work was carried out, the objectives set and/or the 
problem to be solved, the working hypotheses, etc.; 
 The experimental conditions used (protocols, particular parameters and material 
used ...); and 
 The results obtained, their possible interpretation, as well as any ideas, reflections 
or comments relating thereto. 
 
Note 7:  If a protocol has already been previously described, in the same or different 
laboratory notebook, it is not necessary to reproduce the entire information for a new 
entry.  Rather, it is sufficient to simply reference the previous occurrence with 
particularity, i.e., the laboratory notebook number and page(s) concerned along with the 
name of its author.  All modifications, changes, or adaptations to the referenced 
information must be sufficiently described.  Referencing scientific publications or books is 
permissible if identified unambiguously using a full bibliographical citation. 
 
Abbreviations may be used.  However, abbreviations that are non-standard to persons 
having ordinary skill in the relevant field must be defined at their first appearance.  Further, 
abbreviations, along with their definition, should also be recorded after the table of 
contents/index section at the front of the laboratory notebook. 
 
Note 8:  It is possible to create a separate laboratory notebook specifically reserved for 
recording standard laboratory or testing procedures and protocols, abbreviations, etc., and 
then make an appropriate reference to this separate laboratory notebook. 
 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 7 of 10 
 
2.3. Required Duties of Author and Witness 
 
Each laboratory notebook must be regularly submitted to a witness review process. 
Witnesses are Mane employees having the ability or background to understand the invention. 
For example, if the invention involves advanced chemical or electronic concepts, the witness 
must possess adequate background in the relevant field.  If called upon later, the witness must 
be able to testify to their own knowledge that the facts of the entry are correct.  However, the 
witness must not have the status of co-author (joint researcher) of the recorded information, 
nor should the witness be able to be considered as co-inventor of any invention resulting from 
all or part of the experimental information.  Accordingly, the witness should not be a 
collaborator on the same/similar projects as the drafter. Preferably, the witness will be chosen 
from another team or department. 
 
a. Duties of the author: 
 
 Each page must be dated. 
 Each page of the laboratory book, as soon as it is completed, must be dated 
and signed by the author, in the space designated for this purpose. 
 Any mistakes or crossed-out entries, as soon as they appear in the laboratory 
book, must be dated and signed by the author. 
 Do not insert any information (including corrections) in a corner of a page 
(even if that page has not yet been countersigned by a witness). 
 If any error or mistake is identified, the erroneous information should be 
clearly identified and corrected in a space immediately below the error.  If 
there is no available space or the available space is insufficient, then 
corrections may be made on a subsequent page (with an appropriate forward 
reference on the page bearing the erroneous information).  If the date on which 
the error was found and/or corrected is different from the origin date, said 
correction date should be properly recorded.  
 Unused lines or space at the bottom of the page should be crossed out using a 
"Z" marking. 
 In order to certify the reality of the recording, the author must have a witness 
sign each of the pages of his laboratory notebook within a maximum of 4 
weeks after the writing of each of these pages.  
 No new information or data integration can be entered onto any page that has 
been already signed by a witness. 
 
b. Duties of the witness: 
 
 Read the information entered by the author/researcher to evaluate whether the 
level of detail is sufficient to enable its reproduction by another having 
ordinary skill in the relevant art.  
 Co-sign all taped or glued inserts.  The date and signature must be affixed 
astride the insert and its supporting page surface. 
 Verify the quality of the information with regard to compliance with Mane's 
Laboratory Notebook Policy, along with laboratory recordkeeping procedures 
found at the front of the laboratory notebook itself.  
 
 
 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 8 of 10 
 
By the words "READ AND UNDERSTOOD", the witness attests that his/her duties have 
been performed and then affixes his/her signature in the adjacent space reserved for that 
purpose.  By this signature, the witness does not express agreement with respect to its 
technical content.  The witness shall not be responsible for any errors or inaccuracies in the 
recorded technical data and information that may be subsequently noted.     
 
Should the witness deem the information insufficient for understanding, or finds error(s) 
with the form or manner of recording the information in the laboratory notebook, the witness 
shall inform the author.  Corrective measures must be taken by the author (or supervisor) to 
address the insufficiency or error(s).  After clarification/correction, the witness may complete 
his/her duties by applying the witness signature and date on the page. 
 
The witness may only review pages that have been filled in their entirety.  Accordingly, 
unused lines or space above the signature blocks need to be properly addressed by the author 
(possibly with one or more "Z" marks to mark spaces left empty). 
 
3. Certification 
 
The holder/assignee of a laboratory notebook must have it certified, twice a year at the 
time of certification sessions organized in May and November, by a member of Mane's Legal 
and IP Department.  All laboratory notebooks, in progress or completed, must be submitted to 
the Legal and IP Department on the working day immediately preceding the certification 
date. Prior to this submission, the holder of a laboratory notebook must ensure that the 
information in each laboratory notebook is correctly recorded, including marking out any 
significant empty space (e.g., marked out with a "Z"), updating the table of contents, as well 
as arranging for the proper witnessing of the notebook. 
 
During certification, each laboratory notebook shall be inspected with regard to 
compliance with this policy.  At the end of this inspection, the reviewer will make an entry 
into the laboratory notebook and notate the completed inspection by affixing the reviewer's 
stamp, date, and signature.  At the end of each certification, the notebook will be promptly 
returned to its assignee, ideally no later than the next working day after certification. 
 
For remote Innovation sites without a local or regional representative from MANE’s 
Legal and IP Department, arrangements will be made based on the volume of laboratory 
notebooks to enable completion of the certification process without undue expense of time or 
resources. 
 
4. Archiving 
 
Each person assigned to a laboratory notebook is responsible for the maintenance of the 
notebook while it is in his/her possession.  The assigned person (or holder) must ensure that 
each assigned laboratory book (s) is stored in a safe and secure location to prevent loss, theft, 
or degradation.  If a laboratory notebook is lost, stolen, or damaged, the assigned person shall 
immediately notify his/her supervisor.  The holder and supervisor shall immediately prepare a 
report detailing the circumstances leading to the loss, theft, or degradation, and the completed 
report is to be submitted to the Legal and IP Department for review and investigation. 
 
Prior to preserving an electronic copy of a laboratory notebook, the holder must ensure 
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Department 
October 27, 2017 
Page 9 of 10 
 
that 1) the content of the notebook meets the standards set forth in this policy, and 2) the 
notebook is certified (per Section 3 above).  Once a notebook is complete and certified, the 
holder should make arrangements with the VP of R&D to begin the laboratory notebook 
scanning/archiving process.  After securing an electronic archival copy of the laboratory 
notebook, the original hardcopy will be returned to its originally assigned holder for a 
reasonable period, which shall not exceed three (3) years from the date of last entry.   
 
After the reasonable retention period, the original hardcopy of the laboratory notebook 
will be turned in to the VP of R&D (or site Director), who will arrange for long term storage 
of the notebook within a fire resistant container at the local Mane Innovation site, such as a 
fire resistant safe utilized by Accounting or Human Resource departments.  
 
 
Appendix:    Laboratory Recordkeeping Procedures 
 
Mane Legal & IP Department  
October 27, 2017 
Page 10 of 10 
 
General Instruction 
Laboratory Notebooks are the means for keeping a permanent record of the details of an individual's day-to-day 
work in the research and development areas.  They provide 1) a basic reference which the individual and others 
can refer to at a later date; 2) legal evidence with respect to the materials recorded, such as conception of an 
invention and date thereof or date of reduction to practice and test results; and 3) in some instances, compliance 
with the provisions of many contractual arrangements. 
Instructions for Recording Data in the Laboratory Notebook 
1. 
All entries should be made in a legible and orderly manner using permanent ink, preferably black.  Make entries 
clear and complete, that someone else could repeat the experiment. 
2. 
Avoid erasures.  If an error is made, cross it out and make the correction immediately thereafter.  Cancellations 
or insertions should be initialed, dated, and explained by an appropriate notation. 
3. 
Make sure control page is filled out prior to usage. 
4. 
Complete the table of contents as you make entries in the notebook. 
5. 
State the object and results of each experiment clearly and concisely.  Give a complete, factual, and self-
explanatory account of the progress of the work and the procedure followed (reference to earlier work done by 
yourself or another may be accomplished by noting a previous page of the same notebook or the page and 
number of an earlier notebook).  Describe and give quantities of all materials used.  Explain all code numbers 
and abbreviations. 
6. 
An entry dealing with a conception (invention, idea) must describe the thing conceived.  (Example, whether it is 
a chemical compound, a combination of a compound and a solvent, etc.) as well as the utility for the ting 
conceived, how it is to be used and the method(s) by which it is to be prepared, including equivalent materials 
which could be used.  Statements with regard to utility should be stated positively.  Work toward practical 
implementation of an invention should start as soon as possible in a notebook. 
7. 
Negative or deprecatory entries should be avoided.  (Example:  A reaction gives a 2% yield was expected.  Do 
not state "Process does not work".)  Phraseology which expresses an opinion rather than a positive statement 
and gratuitous comments should be avoided.  This is not an instruction to omit the conclusion of an experiment 
which had less than the expected results.  Be factual. 
8. 
Each day's work should, whenever possible, be started on a separate page with lines drawn down angularly 
across the unused portion of the previous page. (This gives legal evidence that additions were not made at a later 
date.)  It is permissible, as stated above, to make reference to an earlier page by reciting "Continued from page 
…".  It is extremely important that each page show the date of entry. 
9. 
Each page must be signed and dated by the individual who makes the entry and does the work.  In addition, each 
page must be witnessed (signed and dated), using the notation "Read and Understood", preferably on the same 
day, but at least within one week.  The witness should not be connected with the conception, should not have 
taken part in the experimental work performed by another, but should understand the technical filed of the entry.  
Record Laboratory Notebook Number and project on each page. 
10. Where a conception is made by two or more individuals, it need only be entered in the notebook of one, but 
must be signed and dated by all the conceivers.  Ideally, all conceivers should sign on the same day. 
11. For microfilming purposes, graphs, charts, analytical data, etc. must be attached to the notebook pages with a 
permanent adhesive and should, when unfolded, be kept within the confines of the opened notebook. NO 
ENTRIES SHOULD BE MADE ON THE PAGE BENEATH ATTACHED SHEETS AND NOTHING MUST 
BE OBSCURED.  Leave the heading on the top and the space provided for the witnessing signature at the 
bottom of each page exposed.  Inserts should be signed and dated by the person making the entry and witnessed 
by another to provide the best legal evidence.  If materials such as spectra, graphs, etc. are not kept in the 
notebook, they must be signed, dated and identified in such a manner as to provide a reference back to the 
pertinent page(s) of the Laboratory Notebook itself. 
12. Report the loss or theft of a research notebook. 
13. Following the use of all the pages of each notebook, it must be sent to the Library for record maintenance.  
Make sure table of contents pages are complete.  After it has been recorded it will be returned to the individual.  
An individual may retain in his possession the Laboratory Notebook immediately preceding the one in which 
entries are currently being made.  Normally, all other Laboratory Notebooks will be kept on file in the Library 
or in vault storage.  They may then be checked out for reasonable lengths of time by authorized individuals. 
 
Instructions read and included/understood by: 
Date: 
Signature: 
