German law
Swiss Law
French Law
Laws of Ohio, New Jersey, New York, Delaware
Dutch law
Specific legal requirements 
Legislation based on EU Directive 
2011/7/EU on combating late payments in 
commercial transactions
Since Switzerland is not a member state 
of the EU, European Directive 2011/7/EU 
is not applicable.
Legislation based on EU Directive 
2011/7/EU on combating late payment in 
commercial transactions
None
Legislation based on EU Directive 
2011/7/EU on combating late payments in 
commercial transactions
Provision
Art 286 BGB
No provisions 
Art L441-10 of the French commercial 
code 
Mandatory rules which cannot be 
bypassed by French companies submitting 
supply agreements to another applicable 
law than French law. 
None
Article 6:119a(4) of the Dutch Civil Code
Default payment term
A payment is always due immediately if 
the parties have not agreed to specific 
deviating payment terms
Swiss law does not provide for any 
standard payment term. the principle of 
contractual freedom applies. Hence, in 
the absence of a contractually agreed
payment term, a creditor may usually 
request immediate payment.
30 days if non contractual payment term 
has been agreed between the parties
Payment is due upon the later of delivery or end 
of the inspection period. (UCC 2-320 as enacted 
in each state)
30 days 
Longer payment terms
Parties are generally free to agree to 
payment terms of up to 60 days from the 
receipt of the invoice. A longer payment 
term is only valid if the parties expressly 
agree to it and if this extended payment 
term is not grossly unfair to the creditor
Parties are always free to agree to 
extended payment terms. No specific 
circumstances are required for such a 
contractual arrangement
Parties may decide to extend the 
standard payment term provided that 
such agreed payment term does not 
exceed the following maxima 
60 days from the date of issuance of the 
invoice
45 days end of month from the date of 
inssuance of the invoice 
45 days from the date of issuance of the 
invoice for periodic invoices 
Parties are always free to agree to extended 
payment terms. No specific circumstances are 
required for such a contractual arrangement
Large companies as a purchaser cannot 
agree to a payment term longer than 60 
days in new contracts with small and 
medium-sized companies which are their 
suppliers.
Regarding other cases, the law allows 
payment terms longer than 60 days, as 
long as this does not unfairly impact the 
creditor.
 
Penalties for breach of 
payment terms
The creditor would be entitled to 
statutory interest at the rate of 9%
Since there is no specific payment term 
legislation, there is no penalty imposed 
for breaching such legislation.
An administrative fine up to €2 million 
and the publication of the sanction in 
case of an infringement of French 
payment terms legislation
No mandatory interest unless awarded by a 
court.
The clause can be null and void and the 
creditor is entitled to a statutory interest 
at the rate of 9%
Confidential - for internal purposes only
We have analyzed the laws of the various countries in which our competitors are located to find out what their practices are in terms of payment terms. We can observe that contractual freedom is present in every countries except in France, where the 
payment terms cannnot exceed 60 days.
Regarding the DSM-Firmenich merger, three of its entities are based in Switzerland and one of its entities is located in the Netherlands (Food & Beverage/Taste & Beyond) . We can observe that the Firmenich's Dutch entity is not at a disadvantage 
compared with what applied when the entity was Swiss, meaning the contractual freedom of the parties regarding payment terms and their extension.  
Mane / Legal & IP Department / Hasna ASSBAI                    Updated on October 3rd 2023                                                 Page 1 of 1
