I 
(Legislative acts) 
REGULATIONS 
REGULATION (EU) No 1215/2012 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 
of 12 December 2012 
on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters 
(recast) 
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE 
EUROPEAN UNION, 
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union, and in particular Article 67(4) and points (a), (c) and (e) 
of Article 81(2) thereof, 
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, 
After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national 
parliaments, 
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and 
Social Committee ( 1 ), 
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ), 
Whereas: 
(1) 
On 21 April 2009, the Commission adopted a report on 
the application of Council Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 
of 22 December 2000 on jurisdiction and the recog­
nition and enforcement of judgments in civil and 
commercial matters ( 3 ). The report concluded that, in 
general, the operation of that Regulation is satisfactory, 
but that it is desirable to improve the application of 
certain of its provisions, to further facilitate the free 
circulation of judgments and to further enhance access 
to justice. Since a number of amendments are to be 
made to that Regulation it should, in the interests of 
clarity, be recast. 
(2) 
At its meeting in Brussels on 10 and 11 December 2009, 
the European Council adopted a new multiannual 
programme entitled ‘The Stockholm Programme – an 
open 
and 
secure Europe serving and 
protecting 
citizens’ ( 4 ). In the Stockholm Programme the European 
Council considered that the process of abolishing all 
intermediate 
measures 
(the 
exequatur) 
should 
be 
continued during the period covered by that Programme. 
At the same time the abolition of the exequatur should 
also be accompanied by a series of safeguards. 
(3) 
The Union has set itself the objective of maintaining and 
developing an area of freedom, security and justice, inter 
alia, by facilitating access to justice, in particular through 
the principle of mutual recognition of judicial and extra- 
judicial decisions in civil matters. For the gradual estab­
lishment of such an area, the Union is to adopt measures 
relating to judicial cooperation in civil matters having 
cross-border implications, particularly when necessary 
for the proper functioning of the internal market. 
(4) 
Certain differences between national rules governing 
jurisdiction and recognition of judgments hamper the 
sound operation of the internal market. Provisions to 
unify the rules of conflict of jurisdiction in civil and 
commercial matters, and to ensure rapid and simple 
recognition and enforcement of judgments given in a 
Member State, are essential. 
(5) 
Such provisions fall within the area of judicial 
cooperation in civil matters within the meaning of 
Article 81 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the 
European Union (TFEU).
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/1 
( 1 ) OJ C 218, 23.7.2011, p. 78. 
( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 20 November 2012 (not yet 
published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 
6 December 2012. 
( 3 ) OJ L 12, 16.1.2001, p. 1. 
( 4 ) OJ C 115, 4.5.2010, p. 1.
(6) 
In order to attain the objective of free circulation of 
judgments in civil and commercial matters, it is 
necessary and appropriate that the rules governing juris­
diction and the recognition and enforcement of 
judgments be governed by a legal instrument of the 
Union which is binding and directly applicable. 
(7) 
On 27 September 1968, the then Member States of the 
European Communities, acting under Article 220, fourth 
indent, of the Treaty establishing the European Economic 
Community, concluded the Brussels Convention on Juris­
diction and the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and 
Commercial 
Matters, 
subsequently 
amended 
by 
conventions on the accession to that Convention of 
new Member States ( 1 ) (‘the 1968 Brussels Convention’). 
On 16 September 1988, the then Member States of the 
European 
Communities 
and 
certain 
EFTA 
States 
concluded the Lugano Convention on Jurisdiction and 
the Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial 
Matters ( 2 ) (‘the 1988 Lugano Convention’), which is a 
parallel convention to the 1968 Brussels Convention. 
The 1988 Lugano Convention became applicable to 
Poland on 1 February 2000. 
(8) 
On 22 December 2000, the Council adopted Regulation 
(EC) No 44/2001, which replaces the 1968 Brussels 
Convention with regard to the territories of the 
Member States covered by the TFEU, as between the 
Member States except Denmark. By Council Decision 
2006/325/EC ( 3 ), 
the 
Community 
concluded 
an 
agreement with Denmark ensuring the application of 
the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 in 
Denmark. The 1988 Lugano Convention was revised 
by the Convention on Jurisdiction and the Recognition 
and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil and Commercial 
Matters ( 4 ), signed at Lugano on 30 October 2007 by the 
Community, Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Switzerland 
(‘the 2007 Lugano Convention’). 
(9) 
The 1968 Brussels Convention continues to apply to the 
territories of the Member States which fall within the 
territorial scope of that Convention and which are 
excluded from this Regulation pursuant to Article 355 
of the TFEU. 
(10) 
The scope of this Regulation should cover all the main 
civil and commercial matters apart from certain well- 
defined matters, in particular maintenance obligations, 
which should be excluded from the scope of this Regu­
lation following the adoption of Council Regulation (EC) 
No 4/2009 of 18 December 2008 on jurisdiction, 
applicable 
law, 
recognition 
and 
enforcement 
of 
decisions and cooperation in matters relating to main­
tenance obligations ( 5 ). 
(11) 
For the purposes of this Regulation, courts or tribunals of 
the Member States should include courts or tribunals 
common to several Member States, such as the Benelux 
Court of Justice when it exercises jurisdiction on matters 
falling within the scope of this Regulation. Therefore, 
judgments given by such courts should be recognised 
and enforced in accordance with this Regulation. 
(12) 
This Regulation should not apply to arbitration. Nothing 
in this Regulation should prevent the courts of a Member 
State, when seised of an action in a matter in respect of 
which the parties have entered into an arbitration 
agreement, from referring the parties to arbitration, 
from staying or dismissing the proceedings, or from 
examining whether the arbitration agreement is null 
and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed, 
in accordance with their national law. 
A ruling given by a court of a Member State as to 
whether or not an arbitration agreement is null and 
void, inoperative or incapable of being performed 
should not be subject to the rules of recognition and 
enforcement laid down in this Regulation, regardless of 
whether the court decided on this as a principal issue or 
as an incidental question. 
On the other hand, where a court of a Member State, 
exercising jurisdiction under this Regulation or under 
national law, has determined that an arbitration 
agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of 
being performed, this should not preclude that court’s 
judgment on the substance of the matter from being 
recognised or, as the case may be, enforced in accordance 
with this Regulation. This should be without prejudice to 
the competence of the courts of the Member States to 
decide on the recognition and enforcement of arbitral 
awards in accordance with the Convention on the Recog­
nition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done 
at New York on 10 June 1958 (‘the 1958 New York 
Convention’), which takes precedence over this Regu­
lation. 
This Regulation should not apply to any action or 
ancillary proceedings relating to, in particular, the estab­
lishment of an arbitral tribunal, the powers of arbitrators, 
the conduct of an arbitration procedure or any other 
aspects of such a procedure, nor to any action or 
judgment concerning the annulment, review, appeal, 
recognition or enforcement of an arbitral award.
EN 
L 351/2 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012 
( 1 ) OJ L 299, 31.12.1972, p. 32, OJ L 304, 30.10.1978, p. 1, OJ 
L 388, 31.12.1982, p. 1, OJ L 285, 3.10.1989, p. 1, OJ C 15, 
15.1.1997, p. 1. For a consolidated text, see OJ C 27, 26.1.1998, 
p. 1. 
( 2 ) OJ L 319, 25.11.1988, p. 9. 
( 3 ) OJ L 120, 5.5.2006, p. 22. 
( 4 ) OJ L 147, 10.6.2009, p. 5. 
( 5 ) OJ L 7, 10.1.2009, p. 1.
(13) 
There must be a connection between proceedings to 
which this Regulation applies and the territory of the 
Member States. Accordingly, common rules of juris­
diction should, in principle, apply when the defendant 
is domiciled in a Member State. 
(14) 
A defendant not domiciled in a Member State should in 
general be subject to the national rules of jurisdiction 
applicable in the territory of the Member State of the 
court seised. 
However, in order to ensure the protection of consumers 
and employees, to safeguard the jurisdiction of the courts 
of the Member States in situations where they have 
exclusive jurisdiction and to respect the autonomy of 
the parties, certain rules of jurisdiction in this Regulation 
should apply regardless of the defendant’s domicile. 
(15) 
The rules of jurisdiction should be highly predictable and 
founded on the principle that jurisdiction is generally 
based on the defendant’s domicile. Jurisdiction should 
always be available on this ground save in a few well- 
defined situations in which the subject-matter of the 
dispute or the autonomy of the parties warrants a 
different connecting factor. The domicile of a legal 
person must be defined autonomously so as to make 
the common rules more transparent and avoid conflicts 
of jurisdiction. 
(16) 
In addition to the defendant’s domicile, there should be 
alternative grounds of jurisdiction based on a close 
connection between the court and the action or in 
order to facilitate the sound administration of justice. 
The existence of a close connection should ensure legal 
certainty and avoid the possibility of the defendant being 
sued in a court of a Member State which he could not 
reasonably have foreseen. This is important, particularly 
in 
disputes concerning non-contractual obligations 
arising out of violations of privacy and rights relating 
to personality, including defamation. 
(17) 
The owner of a cultural object as defined in Article 1(1) 
of Council Directive 93/7/EEC of 15 March 1993 on the 
return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the 
territory of a Member State ( 1 ) should be able under this 
Regulation to initiate proceedings as regards a civil claim 
for the recovery, based on ownership, of such a cultural 
object in the courts for the place where the cultural 
object is situated at the time the court is seised. Such 
proceedings should be without prejudice to proceedings 
initiated under Directive 93/7/EEC. 
(18) 
In relation to insurance, consumer and employment 
contracts, the weaker party should be protected by 
rules of jurisdiction more favourable to his interests 
than the general rules. 
(19) 
The autonomy of the parties to a contract, other than an 
insurance, consumer or employment contract, where 
only limited autonomy to determine the courts having 
jurisdiction is allowed, should be respected subject to the 
exclusive grounds of jurisdiction laid down in this Regu­
lation. 
(20) 
Where a question arises as to whether a choice-of-court 
agreement in favour of a court or the courts of a 
Member State is null and void as to its substantive 
validity, that question should be decided in accordance 
with the law of the Member State of the court or courts 
designated in the agreement, including the conflict-of- 
laws rules of that Member State. 
(21) 
In the interests of the harmonious administration of 
justice it is necessary to minimise the possibility of 
concurrent proceedings and to ensure that irreconcilable 
judgments will not be given in different Member States. 
There should be a clear and effective mechanism for 
resolving cases of lis pendens and related actions, and 
for obviating problems flowing from national differences 
as to the determination of the time when a case is 
regarded as pending. For the purposes of this Regulation, 
that time should be defined autonomously. 
(22) 
However, in order to enhance the effectiveness of 
exclusive choice-of-court agreements and to avoid 
abusive litigation tactics, it is necessary to provide for 
an exception to the general lis pendens rule in order to 
deal satisfactorily with a particular situation in which 
concurrent proceedings may arise. This is the situation 
where a court not designated in an exclusive choice-of- 
court agreement has been seised of proceedings and the 
designated court is seised subsequently of proceedings 
involving the same cause of action and between the 
same parties. In such a case, the court first seised 
should be required to stay its proceedings as soon as 
the designated court has been seised and until such 
time as the latter court declares that it has no jurisdiction 
under the exclusive choice-of-court agreement. This is to 
ensure that, in such a situation, the designated court has 
priority to decide on the validity of the agreement and 
on the extent to which the agreement applies to the 
dispute pending before it. The designated court should 
be able to proceed irrespective of whether the non- 
designated court has already decided on the stay of 
proceedings.
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/3 
( 1 ) OJ L 74, 27.3.1993, p. 74.
This exception should not cover situations where the 
parties have entered into conflicting exclusive choice-of- 
court agreements or where a court designated in an 
exclusive choice-of-court agreement has been seised 
first. In such cases, the general lis pendens rule of this 
Regulation should apply. 
(23) 
This Regulation should provide for a flexible mechanism 
allowing the courts of the Member States to take into 
account proceedings pending before the courts of third 
States, considering in particular whether a judgment of a 
third 
State 
will 
be 
capable 
of 
recognition 
and 
enforcement in the Member State concerned under the 
law of that Member State and the proper administration 
of justice. 
(24) 
When taking into account the proper administration of 
justice, the court of the Member State concerned should 
assess all the circumstances of the case before it. Such 
circumstances may include connections between the facts 
of the case and the parties and the third State concerned, 
the stage to which the proceedings in the third State have 
progressed by the time proceedings are initiated in the 
court of the Member State and whether or not the court 
of the third State can be expected to give a judgment 
within a reasonable time. 
That assessment may also include consideration of the 
question whether the court of the third State has 
exclusive jurisdiction in the particular case in circum­
stances where a court of a Member State would have 
exclusive jurisdiction. 
(25) 
The notion of provisional, including protective, measures 
should include, for example, protective orders aimed at 
obtaining information or preserving evidence as referred 
to in Articles 6 and 7 of Directive 2004/48/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 
2004 on the enforcement of intellectual property 
rights ( 1 ). It should not include measures which are not 
of a protective nature, such as measures ordering the 
hearing of a witness. This should be without prejudice 
to 
the 
application 
of 
Council 
Regulation 
(EC) 
No 1206/2001 of 28 May 2001 on cooperation 
between the courts of the Member States in the taking 
of evidence in civil or commercial matters ( 2 ). 
(26) 
Mutual trust in the administration of justice in the Union 
justifies the principle that judgments given in a Member 
State should be recognised in all Member States without 
the need for any special procedure. In addition, the aim 
of making cross-border litigation less time-consuming 
and costly justifies the abolition of the declaration of 
enforceability prior to enforcement in the Member 
State addressed. As a result, a judgment given by the 
courts of a Member State should be treated as if it had 
been given in the Member State addressed. 
(27) 
For the purposes of the free circulation of judgments, a 
judgment given in a Member State should be recognised 
and enforced in another Member State even if it is given 
against a person not domiciled in a Member State. 
(28) 
Where a judgment contains a measure or order which is 
not known in the law of the Member State addressed, 
that measure or order, including any right indicated 
therein, should, to the extent possible, be adapted to 
one which, under the law of that Member State, has 
equivalent effects attached to it and pursues similar 
aims. How, and by whom, the adaptation is to be 
carried out should be determined by each Member State. 
(29) 
The direct enforcement in the Member State addressed of 
a judgment given in another Member State without a 
declaration of enforceability should not jeopardise 
respect for the rights of the defence. Therefore, the 
person against whom enforcement is sought should be 
able to apply for refusal of the recognition or 
enforcement of a judgment if he considers one of the 
grounds for refusal of recognition to be present. This 
should include the ground that he had not had the 
opportunity to arrange for his defence where the 
judgment was given in default of appearance in a civil 
action linked to criminal proceedings. It should also 
include the grounds which could be invoked on the 
basis of an agreement between the Member State 
addressed and a third State concluded pursuant to 
Article 59 of the 1968 Brussels Convention. 
(30) 
A party challenging the enforcement of a judgment given 
in another Member State should, to the extent possible 
and in accordance with the legal system of the Member 
State addressed, be able to invoke, in the same procedure, 
in addition to the grounds for refusal provided for in this 
Regulation, the grounds for refusal available under 
national law and within the time-limits laid down in 
that law. 
The recognition of a judgment should, however, be 
refused only if one or more of the grounds for refusal 
provided for in this Regulation are present.
EN 
L 351/4 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012 
( 1 ) OJ L 157, 30.4.2004, p. 45. 
( 2 ) OJ L 174, 27.6.2001, p. 1.
(31) 
Pending a challenge to the enforcement of a judgment, it 
should be possible for the courts in the Member State 
addressed, during the entire proceedings relating to such 
a challenge, including any appeal, to allow the 
enforcement to proceed subject to a limitation of the 
enforcement or to the provision of security. 
(32) 
In order to inform the person against whom enforcement 
is sought of the enforcement of a judgment given in 
another Member State, the certificate established under 
this Regulation, if necessary accompanied by the 
judgment, should be served on that person in reasonable 
time before the first enforcement measure. In this 
context, the first enforcement measure should mean the 
first enforcement measure after such service. 
(33) 
Where provisional, including protective, measures are 
ordered by a court having jurisdiction as to the 
substance of the matter, their free circulation should be 
ensured under this Regulation. However, provisional, 
including protective, measures which were ordered by 
such a court without the defendant being summoned 
to appear should not be recognised and enforced under 
this Regulation unless the judgment containing the 
measure is served on the defendant prior to enforcement. 
This 
should 
not 
preclude 
the 
recognition 
and 
enforcement of such measures under national law. 
Where provisional, including protective, measures are 
ordered by a court of a Member State not having juris­
diction as to the substance of the matter, the effect of 
such measures should be confined, under this Regulation, 
to the territory of that Member State. 
(34) 
Continuity between the 1968 Brussels Convention, Regu­
lation (EC) No 44/2001 and this Regulation should be 
ensured, and transitional provisions should be laid down 
to that end. The same need for continuity applies as 
regards the interpretation by the Court of Justice of the 
European Union of the 1968 Brussels Convention and of 
the Regulations replacing it. 
(35) 
Respect for international commitments entered into by 
the Member States means that this Regulation should not 
affect conventions relating to specific matters to which 
the Member States are parties. 
(36) 
Without prejudice to the obligations of the Member 
States under the Treaties, this Regulation should not 
affect the application of bilateral conventions and 
agreements between a third State and a Member State 
concluded before the date of entry into force of Regu­
lation (EC) No 44/2001 which concern matters governed 
by this Regulation. 
(37) 
In order to ensure that the certificates to be used in 
connection with the recognition or enforcement of judg­
ments, authentic instruments and court settlements under 
this Regulation are kept up-to-date, the power to adopt 
acts in accordance with Article 290 of the TFEU should 
be 
delegated to 
the 
Commission 
in 
respect of 
amendments to Annexes I and II to this Regulation. It 
is of particular importance that the Commission carry 
out appropriate consultations during its preparatory 
work, including at expert level. The Commission, when 
preparing and drawing up delegated acts, should ensure a 
simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission of 
relevant documents to the European Parliament and to 
the Council. 
(38) 
This Regulation respects fundamental rights and observes 
the principles recognised in the Charter of Fundamental 
Rights of the European Union, in particular the right to 
an effective remedy and to a fair trial guaranteed in 
Article 47 of the Charter. 
(39) 
Since the objective of this Regulation cannot be suffi­
ciently achieved by the Member States and can be 
better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt 
measures in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity 
as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union 
(TEU). In accordance with the principle of propor­
tionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation does 
not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that 
objective. 
(40) 
The United Kingdom and Ireland, in accordance with 
Article 3 of the Protocol on the position of the United 
Kingdom and Ireland, annexed to the TEU and to the 
then Treaty establishing the European Community, took 
part in the adoption and application of Regulation (EC) 
No 44/2001. In accordance with Article 3 of Protocol 
No 21 on the position of the United Kingdom and 
Ireland in respect of the area of freedom, security and 
justice, annexed to the TEU and to the TFEU, the United 
Kingdom and Ireland have notified their wish to take part 
in the adoption and application of this Regulation. 
(41) 
In accordance with Articles 1 and 2 of Protocol No 22 
on the position of Denmark annexed to the TEU and to 
the TFEU, Denmark is not taking part in the adoption of 
this Regulation and is not bound by it or subject to its 
application, without prejudice to the possibility for 
Denmark of applying the amendments to Regulation 
(EC) No 44/2001 
pursuant to Article 3 of the 
Agreement of 19 October 2005 between the European 
Community and the Kingdom of Denmark on juris­
diction and the recognition and enforcement of 
judgments in civil and commercial matters ( 1 ),
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/5 
( 1 ) OJ L 299, 16.11.2005, p. 62.
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: 
CHAPTER I 
SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS 
Article 1 
1. 
This Regulation shall apply in civil and commercial 
matters whatever the nature of the court or tribunal. It shall 
not extend, in particular, to revenue, customs or administrative 
matters or to the liability of the State for acts and omissions in 
the exercise of State authority (acta iure imperii). 
2. 
This Regulation shall not apply to: 
(a) the status or legal capacity of natural persons, rights in 
property arising out of a matrimonial relationship or out 
of a relationship deemed by the law applicable to such 
relationship to have comparable effects to marriage; 
(b) bankruptcy, proceedings relating to the winding-up of 
insolvent companies or other legal persons, judicial arrange­
ments, compositions and analogous proceedings; 
(c) social security; 
(d) arbitration; 
(e) maintenance obligations arising from a family relationship, 
parentage, marriage or affinity; 
(f) wills and succession, including maintenance obligations 
arising by reason of death. 
Article 2 
For the purposes of this Regulation: 
(a) ‘judgment’ means any judgment given by a court or tribunal 
of a Member State, whatever the judgment may be called, 
including a decree, order, decision or writ of execution, as 
well as a decision on the determination of costs or expenses 
by an officer of the court. 
For the purposes of Chapter III, ‘judgment’ includes 
provisional, including protective, measures ordered by a 
court or tribunal which by virtue of this Regulation has 
jurisdiction as to the substance of the matter. It does not 
include a provisional, including protective, measure which is 
ordered by such a court or tribunal without the defendant 
being summoned to appear, unless the judgment containing 
the measure is served on the defendant prior to 
enforcement; 
(b) ‘court settlement’ means a settlement which has been 
approved by a court of a Member State or concluded 
before a court of a Member State in the course of 
proceedings; 
(c) ‘authentic instrument’ means a document which has been 
formally drawn up or registered as an authentic instrument 
in the Member State of origin and the authenticity of which: 
(i) relates to the signature and the content of the 
instrument; and 
(ii) has been established by a public authority or other 
authority empowered for that purpose; 
(d) ‘Member State of origin’ means the Member State in which, 
as the case may be, the judgment has been given, the court 
settlement has been approved or concluded, or the authentic 
instrument has been formally drawn up or registered; 
(e) ‘Member State addressed’ means the Member State in which 
the recognition of the judgment is invoked or in which the 
enforcement of the judgment, the court settlement or the 
authentic instrument is sought; 
(f) ‘court of origin’ means the court which has given the 
judgment the recognition of which is invoked or the 
enforcement of which is sought. 
Article 3 
For the purposes of this Regulation, ‘court’ includes the 
following authorities to the extent that they have jurisdiction 
in matters falling within the scope of this Regulation: 
(a) in Hungary, in summary proceedings concerning orders to 
pay (fizetési meghagyásos eljárás), the notary (közjegyző); 
(b) in Sweden, in summary proceedings concerning orders to 
pay (betalningsföreläggande) and assistance (handräckning), 
the Enforcement Authority (Kronofogdemyndigheten).
EN 
L 351/6 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
CHAPTER II 
JURISDICTION 
SECTION 1 
General provisions 
Article 4 
1. 
Subject to this Regulation, persons domiciled in a Member 
State shall, whatever their nationality, be sued in the courts of 
that Member State. 
2. 
Persons who are not nationals of the Member State in 
which they are domiciled shall be governed by the rules of 
jurisdiction applicable to nationals of that Member State. 
Article 5 
1. 
Persons domiciled in a Member State may be sued in the 
courts of another Member State only by virtue of the rules set 
out in Sections 2 to 7 of this Chapter. 
2. 
In particular, the rules of national jurisdiction of which 
the Member States are to notify the Commission pursuant to 
point (a) of Article 76(1) shall not be applicable as against the 
persons referred to in paragraph 1. 
Article 6 
1. 
If the defendant is not domiciled in a Member State, the 
jurisdiction of the courts of each Member State shall, subject to 
Article 18(1), Article 21(2) and Articles 24 and 25, be 
determined by the law of that Member State. 
2. 
As against such a defendant, any person domiciled in a 
Member State may, whatever his nationality, avail himself in 
that Member State of the rules of jurisdiction there in force, 
and in particular those of which the Member States are to notify 
the Commission pursuant to point (a) of Article 76(1), in the 
same way as nationals of that Member State. 
SECTION 2 
Special jurisdiction 
Article 7 
A person domiciled in a Member State may be sued in another 
Member State: 
(1) (a) in matters relating to a contract, in the courts for the 
place of performance of the obligation in question; 
(b) for the purpose of this provision and unless otherwise 
agreed, the place of performance of the obligation in 
question shall be: 
— in the case of the sale of goods, the place in a 
Member State where, under the contract, the 
goods were delivered or should have been delivered, 
— in the case of the provision of services, the place in 
a Member State where, under the contract, the 
services were provided or should have been 
provided; 
(c) if point (b) does not apply then point (a) applies; 
(2) in matters relating to tort, delict or quasi-delict, in the 
courts for the place where the harmful event occurred or 
may occur; 
(3) as regards a civil claim for damages or restitution which is 
based on an act giving rise to criminal proceedings, in the 
court seised of those proceedings, to the extent that that 
court has jurisdiction under its own law to entertain civil 
proceedings; 
(4) as regards a civil claim for the recovery, based on 
ownership, of a cultural object as defined in point 1 of 
Article 1 of Directive 93/7/EEC initiated by the person 
claiming the right to recover such an object, in the courts 
for the place where the cultural object is situated at the time 
when the court is seised; 
(5) as regards a dispute arising out of the operations of a 
branch, agency or other establishment, in the courts for 
the place where the branch, agency or other establishment 
is situated; 
(6) as regards a dispute brought against a settlor, trustee or 
beneficiary of a trust created by the operation of a 
statute, or by a written instrument, or created orally and 
evidenced in writing, in the courts of the Member State in 
which the trust is domiciled; 
(7) as regards a dispute concerning the payment of remun­
eration claimed in respect of the salvage of a cargo or 
freight, in the court under the authority of which the 
cargo or freight in question: 
(a) has been arrested to secure such payment; or 
(b) could have been so arrested, but bail or other security 
has been given; 
provided that this provision shall apply only if it is claimed 
that the defendant has an interest in the cargo or freight or 
had such an interest at the time of salvage.
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/7
Article 8 
A person domiciled in a Member State may also be sued: 
(1) where he is one of a number of defendants, in the courts 
for the place where any one of them is domiciled, provided 
the claims are so closely connected that it is expedient to 
hear and determine them together to avoid the risk of 
irreconcilable 
judgments 
resulting 
from 
separate 
proceedings; 
(2) as a third party in an action on a warranty or guarantee or 
in any other third-party proceedings, in the court seised of 
the original proceedings, unless these were instituted solely 
with the object of removing him from the jurisdiction of 
the court which would be competent in his case; 
(3) on a counter-claim arising from the same contract or facts 
on which the original claim was based, in the court in 
which the original claim is pending; 
(4) in matters relating to a contract, if the action may be 
combined with an action against the same defendant in 
matters relating to rights in rem in immovable property, 
in the court of the Member State in which the property is 
situated. 
Article 9 
Where by virtue of this Regulation a court of a Member State 
has jurisdiction in actions relating to liability from the use or 
operation of a ship, that court, or any other court substituted 
for this purpose by the internal law of that Member State, shall 
also have jurisdiction over claims for limitation of such liability. 
SECTION 3 
Jurisdiction in matters relating to insurance 
Article 10 
In matters relating to insurance, jurisdiction shall be determined 
by this Section, without prejudice to Article 6 and point 5 of 
Article 7. 
Article 11 
1. 
An insurer domiciled in a Member State may be sued: 
(a) in the courts of the Member State in which he is domiciled; 
(b) in another Member State, in the case of actions brought by 
the policyholder, the insured or a beneficiary, in the courts 
for the place where the claimant is domiciled; or 
(c) if he is a co-insurer, in the courts of a Member State in 
which proceedings are brought against the leading insurer. 
2. 
An insurer who is not domiciled in a Member State but 
has a branch, agency or other establishment in one of the 
Member States shall, in disputes arising out of the operations 
of the branch, agency or establishment, be deemed to be 
domiciled in that Member State. 
Article 12 
In respect of liability insurance or insurance of immovable 
property, the insurer may in addition be sued in the courts 
for the place where the harmful event occurred. The same 
applies if movable and immovable property are covered by 
the same insurance policy and both are adversely affected by 
the same contingency. 
Article 13 
1. 
In respect of liability insurance, the insurer may also, if the 
law of the court permits it, be joined in proceedings which the 
injured party has brought against the insured. 
2. 
Articles 10, 11 and 12 shall apply to actions brought by 
the injured party directly against the insurer, where such direct 
actions are permitted. 
3. 
If the law governing such direct actions provides that the 
policyholder or the insured may be joined as a party to the 
action, the same court shall have jurisdiction over them. 
Article 14 
1. 
Without prejudice to Article 13(3), an insurer may bring 
proceedings only in the courts of the Member State in which 
the defendant is domiciled, irrespective of whether he is the 
policyholder, the insured or a beneficiary. 
2. 
The provisions of this Section shall not affect the right to 
bring a counter-claim in the court in which, in accordance with 
this Section, the original claim is pending. 
Article 15 
The provisions of this Section may be departed from only by an 
agreement: 
(1) which is entered into after the dispute has arisen; 
(2) which allows the policyholder, the insured or a beneficiary 
to bring proceedings in courts other than those indicated in 
this Section; 
(3) which is concluded between a policyholder and an insurer, 
both of whom are at the time of conclusion of the contract 
domiciled or habitually resident in the same Member State, 
and which has the effect of conferring jurisdiction on the 
courts of that Member State even if the harmful event were 
to occur abroad, provided that such an agreement is not 
contrary to the law of that Member State;
EN 
L 351/8 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
(4) which is concluded with a policyholder who is not 
domiciled in a Member State, except in so far as the 
insurance is compulsory or relates to immovable property 
in a Member State; or 
(5) which relates to a contract of insurance in so far as it covers 
one or more of the risks set out in Article 16. 
Article 16 
The following are the risks referred to in point 5 of Article 15: 
(1) any loss of or damage to: 
(a) seagoing ships, installations situated offshore or on the 
high seas, or aircraft, arising from perils which relate to 
their use for commercial purposes; 
(b) goods in transit other than passengers’ baggage where 
the transit consists of or includes carriage by such ships 
or aircraft; 
(2) any liability, other than for bodily injury to passengers or 
loss of or damage to their baggage: 
(a) arising out of the use or operation of ships, installations 
or aircraft as referred to in point 1(a) in so far as, in 
respect of the latter, the law of the Member State in 
which such aircraft are registered does not prohibit 
agreements on jurisdiction regarding insurance of such 
risks; 
(b) for loss or damage caused by goods in transit as 
described in point 1(b); 
(3) any financial loss connected with the use or operation of 
ships, installations or aircraft as referred to in point 1(a), in 
particular loss of freight or charter-hire; 
(4) any risk or interest connected with any of those referred to 
in points 1 to 3; 
(5) notwithstanding points 1 to 4, all ‘large risks’ as defined in 
Directive 2009/138/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 25 November 2009 on the taking-up and 
pursuit of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance 
(Solvency II) ( 1 ). 
SECTION 4 
Jurisdiction over consumer contracts 
Article 17 
1. 
In matters relating to a contract concluded by a person, 
the consumer, for a purpose which can be regarded as being 
outside his trade or profession, jurisdiction shall be determined 
by this Section, without prejudice to Article 6 and point 5 of 
Article 7, if: 
(a) it is a contract for the sale of goods on instalment credit 
terms; 
(b) it is a contract for a loan repayable by instalments, or for 
any other form of credit, made to finance the sale of goods; 
or 
(c) in all other cases, the contract has been concluded with a 
person who pursues commercial or professional activities in 
the Member State of the consumer’s domicile or, by any 
means, directs such activities to that Member State or to 
several States including that Member State, and the contract 
falls within the scope of such activities. 
2. 
Where a consumer enters into a contract with a party 
who is not domiciled in a Member State but has a branch, 
agency or other establishment in one of the Member States, 
that party shall, in disputes arising out of the operations of 
the branch, agency or establishment, be deemed to be 
domiciled in that Member State. 
3. 
This Section shall not apply to a contract of transport 
other than a contract which, for an inclusive price, provides 
for a combination of travel and accommodation. 
Article 18 
1. 
A consumer may bring proceedings against the other 
party to a contract either in the courts of the Member State 
in which that party is domiciled or, regardless of the domicile of 
the other party, in the courts for the place where the consumer 
is domiciled. 
2. 
Proceedings may be brought against a consumer by the 
other party to the contract only in the courts of the Member 
State in which the consumer is domiciled. 
3. 
This Article shall not affect the right to bring a counter- 
claim in the court in which, in accordance with this Section, the 
original claim is pending.
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/9 
( 1 ) OJ L 335, 17.12.2009, p. 1.
Article 19 
The provisions of this Section may be departed from only by an 
agreement: 
(1) which is entered into after the dispute has arisen; 
(2) which allows the consumer to bring proceedings in courts 
other than those indicated in this Section; or 
(3) which is entered into by the consumer and the other party 
to the contract, both of whom are at the time of conclusion 
of the contract domiciled or habitually resident in the same 
Member State, and which confers jurisdiction on the courts 
of that Member State, provided that such an agreement is 
not contrary to the law of that Member State. 
SECTION 5 
Jurisdiction over individual contracts of employment 
Article 20 
1. 
In matters relating to individual contracts of employment, 
jurisdiction shall be determined by this Section, without 
prejudice to Article 6, point 5 of Article 7 and, in the case 
of proceedings brought against an employer, point 1 of 
Article 8. 
2. 
Where an employee enters into an individual contract of 
employment with an employer who is not domiciled in a 
Member State but has a branch, agency or other establishment 
in one of the Member States, the employer shall, in disputes 
arising out of the operations of the branch, agency or estab­
lishment, be deemed to be domiciled in that Member State. 
Article 21 
1. 
An employer domiciled in a Member State may be sued: 
(a) in the courts of the Member State in which he is domiciled; 
or 
(b) in another Member State: 
(i) in the courts for the place where or from where the 
employee habitually carries out his work or in the 
courts for the last place where he did so; or 
(ii) if the employee does not or did not habitually carry out 
his work in any one country, in the courts for the place 
where the business which engaged the employee is or 
was situated. 
2. 
An employer not domiciled in a Member State may be 
sued in a court of a Member State in accordance with point (b) 
of paragraph 1. 
Article 22 
1. 
An employer may bring proceedings only in the courts of 
the Member State in which the employee is domiciled. 
2. 
The provisions of this Section shall not affect the right to 
bring a counter-claim in the court in which, in accordance with 
this Section, the original claim is pending. 
Article 23 
The provisions of this Section may be departed from only by an 
agreement: 
(1) which is entered into after the dispute has arisen; or 
(2) which allows the employee to bring proceedings in courts 
other than those indicated in this Section. 
SECTION 6 
Exclusive jurisdiction 
Article 24 
The following courts of a Member State shall have exclusive 
jurisdiction, regardless of the domicile of the parties: 
(1) in proceedings which have as their object rights in rem in 
immovable property or tenancies of immovable property, 
the courts of the Member State in which the property is 
situated. 
However, in proceedings which have as their object 
tenancies of immovable property concluded for temporary 
private use for a maximum period of six consecutive 
months, the courts of the Member State in which the 
defendant is domiciled shall also have jurisdiction, 
provided that the tenant is a natural person and that the 
landlord and the tenant are domiciled in the same Member 
State; 
(2) in proceedings which have as their object the validity of the 
constitution, the nullity or the dissolution of companies or 
other legal persons or associations of natural or legal 
persons, or the validity of the decisions of their organs, 
the courts of the Member State in which the company, 
legal person or association has its seat. In order to 
determine that seat, the court shall apply its rules of 
private international law; 
(3) in proceedings which have as their object the validity of 
entries in public registers, the courts of the Member State 
in which the register is kept;
EN 
L 351/10 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
(4) in proceedings concerned with the registration or validity of 
patents, trade marks, designs, or other similar rights 
required to be deposited or registered, irrespective of 
whether the issue is raised by way of an action or as a 
defence, the courts of the Member State in which the 
deposit or registration has been applied for, has taken 
place or is under the terms of an instrument of the 
Union or an international convention deemed to have 
taken place. 
Without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the European Patent 
Office under the Convention on the Grant of European 
Patents, signed at Munich on 5 October 1973, the courts 
of each Member State shall have exclusive jurisdiction in 
proceedings concerned with the registration or validity of 
any European patent granted for that Member State; 
(5) in proceedings concerned with the enforcement of judg­
ments, the courts of the Member State in which the 
judgment has been or is to be enforced. 
SECTION 7 
Prorogation of jurisdiction 
Article 25 
1. 
If the parties, regardless of their domicile, have agreed that 
a court or the courts of a Member State are to have jurisdiction 
to settle any disputes which have arisen or which may arise in 
connection with a particular legal relationship, that court or 
those courts shall have jurisdiction, unless the agreement is 
null and void as to its substantive validity under the law of 
that Member State. Such jurisdiction shall be exclusive unless 
the parties have agreed otherwise. The agreement conferring 
jurisdiction shall be either: 
(a) in writing or evidenced in writing; 
(b) in a form which accords with practices which the parties 
have established between themselves; or 
(c) in international trade or commerce, in a form which 
accords with a usage of which the parties are or ought to 
have been aware and which in such trade or commerce is 
widely known to, and regularly observed by, parties to 
contracts of the type involved in the particular trade or 
commerce concerned. 
2. 
Any communication by electronic means which provides 
a durable record of the agreement shall be equivalent to 
‘writing’. 
3. 
The court or courts of a Member State on which a 
trust instrument has conferred jurisdiction shall have exclusive 
jurisdiction in any proceedings brought against a settlor, trustee 
or beneficiary, if relations between those persons or their rights 
or obligations under the trust are involved. 
4. 
Agreements or provisions of a trust instrument conferring 
jurisdiction shall have no legal force if they are contrary to 
Articles 15, 19 or 23, or if the courts whose jurisdiction they 
purport to exclude have exclusive jurisdiction by virtue of 
Article 24. 
5. 
An agreement conferring jurisdiction which forms part of 
a contract shall be treated as an agreement independent of the 
other terms of the contract. 
The validity of the agreement conferring jurisdiction cannot be 
contested solely on the ground that the contract is not valid. 
Article 26 
1. 
Apart from jurisdiction derived from other provisions of 
this Regulation, a court of a Member State before which a 
defendant enters an appearance shall have jurisdiction. This 
rule shall not apply where appearance was entered to contest 
the jurisdiction, or where another court has exclusive juris­
diction by virtue of Article 24. 
2. 
In matters referred to in Sections 3, 4 or 5 where the 
policyholder, the insured, a beneficiary of the insurance 
contract, the injured party, the consumer or the employee is 
the defendant, the court shall, before assuming jurisdiction 
under paragraph 1, ensure that the defendant is informed of 
his right to contest the jurisdiction of the court and of the 
consequences of entering or not entering an appearance. 
SECTION 8 
Examination as to jurisdiction and admissibility 
Article 27 
Where a court of a Member State is seised of a claim which is 
principally concerned with a matter over which the courts of 
another Member State have exclusive jurisdiction by virtue of 
Article 24, it shall declare of its own motion that it has no 
jurisdiction. 
Article 28 
1. 
Where a defendant domiciled in one Member State is sued 
in a court of another Member State and does not enter an 
appearance, the court shall declare of its own motion that it 
has no jurisdiction unless its jurisdiction is derived from the 
provisions of this Regulation.
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/11
2. 
The court shall stay the proceedings so long as it is not 
shown that the defendant has been able to receive the 
document instituting the proceedings or an equivalent 
document in sufficient time to enable him to arrange for his 
defence, or that all necessary steps have been taken to this end. 
3. 
Article 19 of Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 
2007 on the service in the Member States of judicial and extra­
judicial documents in civil or commercial matters (service of 
documents) ( 1 ) shall apply instead of paragraph 2 of this 
Article if the document instituting the proceedings or an 
equivalent document had to be transmitted from one Member 
State to another pursuant to that Regulation. 
4. 
Where Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 is not applicable, 
Article 15 of the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on 
the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in 
Civil or Commercial Matters shall apply if the document insti­
tuting the proceedings or an equivalent document had to be 
transmitted abroad pursuant to that Convention. 
SECTION 9 
Lis pendens — related actions 
Article 29 
1. 
Without prejudice to Article 31(2), where proceedings 
involving the same cause of action and between the same 
parties are brought in the courts of different Member States, 
any court other than the court first seised shall of its own 
motion stay its proceedings until such time as the jurisdiction 
of the court first seised is established. 
2. 
In cases referred to in paragraph 1, upon request by a 
court seised of the dispute, any other court seised shall without 
delay inform the former court of the date when it was seised in 
accordance with Article 32. 
3. 
Where the jurisdiction of the court first seised is estab­
lished, any court other than the court first seised shall decline 
jurisdiction in favour of that court. 
Article 30 
1. 
Where related actions are pending in the courts of 
different Member States, any court other than the court first 
seised may stay its proceedings. 
2. 
Where the action in the court first seised is pending at 
first instance, any other court may also, on the application of 
one of the parties, decline jurisdiction if the court first seised 
has jurisdiction over the actions in question and its law permits 
the consolidation thereof. 
3. 
For the purposes of this Article, actions are deemed to be 
related where they are so closely connected that it is expedient 
to hear and determine them together to avoid the risk of irrec­
oncilable judgments resulting from separate proceedings. 
Article 31 
1. 
Where actions come within the exclusive jurisdiction of 
several courts, any court other than the court first seised shall 
decline jurisdiction in favour of that court. 
2. 
Without prejudice to Article 26, where a court of a 
Member State on which an agreement as referred to in 
Article 25 confers exclusive jurisdiction is seised, any court of 
another Member State shall stay the proceedings until such time 
as the court seised on the basis of the agreement declares that it 
has no jurisdiction under the agreement. 
3. 
Where the court designated in the agreement has estab­
lished jurisdiction in accordance with the agreement, any court 
of another Member State shall decline jurisdiction in favour of 
that court. 
4. 
Paragraphs 2 and 3 shall not apply to matters referred to 
in Sections 3, 4 or 5 where the policyholder, the insured, a 
beneficiary of the insurance contract, the injured party, the 
consumer or the employee is the claimant and the agreement 
is not valid under a provision contained within those Sections. 
Article 32 
1. 
For the purposes of this Section, a court shall be deemed 
to be seised: 
(a) at the time when the document instituting the proceedings 
or an equivalent document is lodged with the court, 
provided that the claimant has not subsequently failed to 
take the steps he was required to take to have service 
effected on the defendant; or 
(b) if the document has to be served before being lodged with 
the court, at the time when it is received by the authority 
responsible for service, provided that the claimant has not 
subsequently failed to take the steps he was required to take 
to have the document lodged with the court. 
The authority responsible for service referred to in point (b) 
shall be the first authority receiving the documents to be served.
EN 
L 351/12 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012 
( 1 ) OJ L 324, 10.12.2007, p. 79.
2. 
The court, or the authority responsible for service, referred 
to in paragraph 1, shall note, respectively, the date of the 
lodging of the document instituting the proceedings or the 
equivalent document, or the date of receipt of the documents 
to be served. 
Article 33 
1. 
Where jurisdiction is based on Article 4 or on Articles 7, 
8 or 9 and proceedings are pending before a court of a third 
State at the time when a court in a Member State is seised of an 
action involving the same cause of action and between the same 
parties as the proceedings in the court of the third State, the 
court of the Member State may stay the proceedings if: 
(a) it is expected that the court of the third State will give a 
judgment capable of recognition and, where applicable, of 
enforcement in that Member State; and 
(b) the court of the Member State is satisfied that a stay is 
necessary for the proper administration of justice. 
2. 
The court of the Member State may continue the 
proceedings at any time if: 
(a) the proceedings in the court of the third State are them­
selves stayed or discontinued; 
(b) it appears to the court of the Member State that the 
proceedings in the court of the third State are unlikely to 
be concluded within a reasonable time; or 
(c) the continuation of the proceedings is required for the 
proper administration of justice. 
3. 
The court of the Member State shall dismiss the 
proceedings if the proceedings in the court of the third State 
are concluded and have resulted in a judgment capable of 
recognition and, where applicable, of enforcement in that 
Member State. 
4. 
The court of the Member State shall apply this Article on 
the application of one of the parties or, where possible under 
national law, of its own motion. 
Article 34 
1. 
Where jurisdiction is based on Article 4 or on Articles 7, 
8 or 9 and an action is pending before a court of a third State 
at the time when a court in a Member State is seised of an 
action which is related to the action in the court of the third 
State, the court of the Member State may stay the proceedings 
if: 
(a) it is expedient to hear and determine the related actions 
together to avoid the risk of irreconcilable judgments 
resulting from separate proceedings; 
(b) it is expected that the court of the third State will give a 
judgment capable of recognition and, where applicable, of 
enforcement in that Member State; and 
(c) the court of the Member State is satisfied that a stay is 
necessary for the proper administration of justice. 
2. 
The court of the Member State may continue the 
proceedings at any time if: 
(a) it appears to the court of the Member State that there is no 
longer a risk of irreconcilable judgments; 
(b) the proceedings in the court of the third State are them­
selves stayed or discontinued; 
(c) it appears to the court of the Member State that the 
proceedings in the court of the third State are unlikely to 
be concluded within a reasonable time; or 
(d) the continuation of the proceedings is required for the 
proper administration of justice. 
3. 
The court of the Member State may dismiss the 
proceedings if the proceedings in the court of the third State 
are concluded and have resulted in a judgment capable of 
recognition and, where applicable, of enforcement in that 
Member State. 
4. 
The court of the Member State shall apply this Article on 
the application of one of the parties or, where possible under 
national law, of its own motion. 
SECTION 10 
Provisional, including protective, measures 
Article 35 
Application may be made to the courts of a Member State for 
such provisional, including protective, measures as may be 
available under the law of that Member State, even if the 
courts of another Member State have jurisdiction as to the 
substance of the matter.
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/13
CHAPTER III 
RECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT 
SECTION 1 
Recognition 
Article 36 
1. 
A judgment given in a Member State shall be recognised 
in the other Member States without any special procedure being 
required. 
2. 
Any interested party may, in accordance with the 
procedure provided for in Subsection 2 of Section 3, apply 
for a decision that there are no grounds for refusal of recog­
nition as referred to in Article 45. 
3. 
If the outcome of proceedings in a court of a Member 
State depends on the determination of an incidental question of 
refusal of recognition, that court shall have jurisdiction over that 
question. 
Article 37 
1. 
A party who wishes to invoke in a Member State a 
judgment given in another Member State shall produce: 
(a) a copy of the judgment which satisfies the conditions 
necessary to establish its authenticity; and 
(b) the certificate issued pursuant to Article 53. 
2. 
The court or authority before which a judgment given in 
another Member State is invoked may, where necessary, require 
the party invoking it to provide, in accordance with Article 57, 
a translation or a transliteration of the contents of the certificate 
referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1. The court or authority 
may require the party to provide a translation of the judgment 
instead of a translation of the contents of the certificate if it is 
unable to proceed without such a translation. 
Article 38 
The court or authority before which a judgment given in 
another Member State is invoked may suspend the proceedings, 
in whole or in part, if: 
(a) the judgment is challenged in the Member State of origin; or 
(b) an application has been submitted for a decision that there 
are no grounds for refusal of recognition as referred to in 
Article 45 or for a decision that the recognition is to be 
refused on the basis of one of those grounds. 
SECTION 2 
Enforcement 
Article 39 
A judgment given in a Member State which is enforceable in 
that Member State shall be enforceable in the other Member 
States without any declaration of enforceability being required. 
Article 40 
An enforceable judgment shall carry with it by operation of law 
the power to proceed to any protective measures which exist 
under the law of the Member State addressed. 
Article 41 
1. 
Subject to the provisions of this Section, the procedure for 
the enforcement of judgments given in another Member State 
shall be governed by the law of the Member State addressed. A 
judgment given in a Member State which is enforceable in the 
Member State addressed shall be enforced there under the same 
conditions as a judgment given in the Member State addressed. 
2. 
Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the grounds for refusal or 
of suspension of enforcement under the law of the Member 
State addressed shall apply in so far as they are not incom­
patible with the grounds referred to in Article 45. 
3. 
The party seeking the enforcement of a judgment given in 
another Member State shall not be required to have a postal 
address in the Member State addressed. Nor shall that party be 
required to have an authorised representative in the Member 
State addressed unless such a representative is mandatory irre­
spective of the nationality or the domicile of the parties. 
Article 42 
1. 
For the purposes of enforcement in a Member State of a 
judgment given in another Member State, the applicant shall 
provide the competent enforcement authority with: 
(a) a copy of the judgment which satisfies the conditions 
necessary to establish its authenticity; and 
(b) the certificate issued pursuant to Article 53, certifying that 
the judgment is enforceable and containing an extract of the 
judgment 
as 
well 
as, 
where 
appropriate, 
relevant 
information on the recoverable costs of the proceedings 
and the calculation of interest.
EN 
L 351/14 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
2. 
For the purposes of enforcement in a Member State of a 
judgment given in another Member State ordering a provisional, 
including a protective, measure, the applicant shall provide the 
competent enforcement authority with: 
(a) a copy of the judgment which satisfies the conditions 
necessary to establish its authenticity; 
(b) the certificate issued pursuant to Article 53, containing a 
description of the measure and certifying that: 
(i) the court has jurisdiction as to the substance of the 
matter; 
(ii) the judgment is enforceable in the Member State of 
origin; and 
(c) where the measure was ordered without the defendant being 
summoned to appear, proof of service of the judgment. 
3. 
The competent enforcement authority may, where 
necessary, require the applicant to provide, in accordance with 
Article 57, a translation or a transliteration of the contents of 
the certificate. 
4. 
The competent enforcement authority may require the 
applicant to provide a translation of the judgment only if it is 
unable to proceed without such a translation. 
Article 43 
1. 
Where enforcement is sought of a judgment given in 
another Member State, the certificate issued pursuant to 
Article 53 shall be served on the person against whom the 
enforcement is sought prior to the first enforcement measure. 
The certificate shall be accompanied by the judgment, if not 
already served on that person. 
2. 
Where the person against whom enforcement is sought is 
domiciled in a Member State other than the Member State of 
origin, he may request a translation of the judgment in order to 
contest the enforcement if the judgment is not written in or 
accompanied by a translation into either of the following 
languages: 
(a) a language which he understands; or 
(b) the official language of the Member State in which he is 
domiciled or, where there are several official languages in 
that Member State, the official language or one of the 
official languages of the place where he is domiciled. 
Where a translation of the judgment is requested under the first 
subparagraph, no measures of enforcement may be taken other 
than protective measures until that translation has been 
provided to the person against whom enforcement is sought. 
This paragraph shall not apply if the judgment has already been 
served on the person against whom enforcement is sought in 
one of the languages referred to in the first subparagraph or is 
accompanied by a translation into one of those languages. 
3. 
This Article shall not apply to the enforcement of a 
protective measure in a judgment or where the person 
seeking enforcement proceeds to protective measures in 
accordance with Article 40. 
Article 44 
1. 
In the event of an application for refusal of enforcement 
of a judgment pursuant to Subsection 2 of Section 3, the court 
in the Member State addressed may, on the application of the 
person against whom enforcement is sought: 
(a) limit the enforcement proceedings to protective measures; 
(b) make enforcement conditional on the provision of such 
security as it shall determine; or 
(c) suspend, either wholly or in part, the enforcement 
proceedings. 
2. 
The competent authority in the Member State addressed 
shall, on the application of the person against whom 
enforcement is sought, suspend the enforcement proceedings 
where the enforceability of the judgment is suspended in the 
Member State of origin. 
SECTION 3 
Refusal of recognition and enforcement 
S u b s e c t i o n 1 
R e f u s a l o f r e c o g n i t i o n 
Article 45 
1. 
On the application of any interested party, the recognition 
of a judgment shall be refused: 
(a) if such recognition is manifestly contrary to public policy 
(ordre public) in the Member State addressed; 
(b) where the judgment was given in default of appearance, if 
the defendant was not served with the document which 
instituted the proceedings or with an equivalent document 
in sufficient time and in such a way as to enable him to 
arrange for his defence, unless the defendant failed to 
commence proceedings to challenge the judgment when it 
was possible for him to do so;
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/15
(c) if the judgment is irreconcilable with a judgment given 
between the same parties in the Member State addressed; 
(d) if the judgment is irreconcilable with an earlier judgment 
given in another Member State or in a third State involving 
the same cause of action and between the same parties, 
provided that the earlier judgment fulfils the conditions 
necessary for its recognition in the Member State addressed; 
or 
(e) if the judgment conflicts with: 
(i) Sections 3, 4 or 5 of Chapter II where the policyholder, 
the insured, a beneficiary of the insurance contract, the 
injured party, the consumer or the employee was the 
defendant; or 
(ii) Section 6 of Chapter II. 
2. 
In its examination of the grounds of jurisdiction referred 
to in point (e) of paragraph 1, the court to which the appli­
cation was submitted shall be bound by the findings of fact on 
which the court of origin based its jurisdiction. 
3. 
Without prejudice to point (e) of paragraph 1, the juris­
diction of the court of origin may not be reviewed. The test of 
public policy referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 may not be 
applied to the rules relating to jurisdiction. 
4. 
The application for refusal of recognition shall be made in 
accordance with the procedures provided for in Subsection 2 
and, where appropriate, Section 4. 
S u b s e c t i o n 2 
R e f u s a l o f e n f o r c e m e n t 
Article 46 
On the application of the person against whom enforcement is 
sought, the enforcement of a judgment shall be refused where 
one of the grounds referred to in Article 45 is found to exist. 
Article 47 
1. 
The application for refusal of enforcement shall be 
submitted to the court which the Member State concerned 
has communicated to the Commission pursuant to point (a) 
of Article 75 as the court to which the application is to be 
submitted. 
2. 
The procedure for refusal of enforcement shall, in so far as 
it is not covered by this Regulation, be governed by the law of 
the Member State addressed. 
3. 
The applicant shall provide the court with a copy of the 
judgment and, where necessary, a translation or transliteration 
of it. 
The court may dispense with the production of the documents 
referred to in the first subparagraph if it already possesses them 
or if it considers it unreasonable to require the applicant to 
provide them. In the latter case, the court may require the 
other party to provide those documents. 
4. 
The party seeking the refusal of enforcement of a 
judgment given in another Member State shall not be 
required to have a postal address in the Member State 
addressed. Nor shall that party be required to have an auth­
orised representative in the Member State addressed unless such 
a representative is mandatory irrespective of the nationality or 
the domicile of the parties. 
Article 48 
The court shall decide on the application for refusal of 
enforcement without delay. 
Article 49 
1. 
The decision on the application for refusal of enforcement 
may be appealed against by either party. 
2. 
The appeal is to be lodged with the court which the 
Member State concerned has communicated to the Commission 
pursuant to point (b) of Article 75 as the court with which such 
an appeal is to be lodged. 
Article 50 
The decision given on the appeal may only be contested by an 
appeal where the courts with which any further appeal is to be 
lodged have been communicated by the Member State 
concerned to the Commission pursuant to point (c) of 
Article 75. 
Article 51 
1. 
The court to which an application for refusal of 
enforcement is submitted or the court which hears an appeal 
lodged under Article 49 or Article 50 may stay the proceedings 
if an ordinary appeal has been lodged against the judgment in 
the Member State of origin or if the time for such an appeal has 
not yet expired. In the latter case, the court may specify the 
time within which such an appeal is to be lodged. 
2. 
Where the judgment was given in Ireland, Cyprus or the 
United Kingdom, any form of appeal available in the Member 
State of origin shall be treated as an ordinary appeal for the 
purposes of paragraph 1.
EN 
L 351/16 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
SECTION 4 
Common provisions 
Article 52 
Under no circumstances may a judgment given in a Member 
State be reviewed as to its substance in the Member State 
addressed. 
Article 53 
The court of origin shall, at the request of any interested party, 
issue the certificate using the form set out in Annex I. 
Article 54 
1. 
If a judgment contains a measure or an order which is not 
known in the law of the Member State addressed, that measure 
or order shall, to the extent possible, be adapted to a measure 
or an order known in the law of that Member State which has 
equivalent effects attached to it and which pursues similar aims 
and interests. 
Such adaptation shall not result in effects going beyond those 
provided for in the law of the Member State of origin. 
2. 
Any party may challenge the adaptation of the measure or 
order before a court. 
3. 
If necessary, the party invoking the judgment or seeking 
its enforcement may be required to provide a translation or a 
transliteration of the judgment. 
Article 55 
A judgment given in a Member State which orders a payment 
by way of a penalty shall be enforceable in the Member State 
addressed only if the amount of the payment has been finally 
determined by the court of origin. 
Article 56 
No security, bond or deposit, however described, shall be 
required of a party who in one Member State applies for the 
enforcement of a judgment given in another Member State on 
the ground that he is a foreign national or that he is not 
domiciled or resident in the Member State addressed. 
Article 57 
1. 
When a translation or a transliteration is required under 
this Regulation, such translation or transliteration shall be into 
the official language of the Member State concerned or, where 
there are several official languages in that Member State, into 
the official language or one of the official languages of court 
proceedings of the place where a judgment given in another 
Member State is invoked or an application is made, in 
accordance with the law of that Member State. 
2. 
For the purposes of the forms referred to in Articles 53 
and 60, translations or transliterations may also be into any 
other official language or languages of the institutions of the 
Union that the Member State concerned has indicated it can 
accept. 
3. 
Any translation made under this Regulation shall be done 
by a person qualified to do translations in one of the Member 
States. 
CHAPTER IV 
AUTHENTIC INSTRUMENTS AND COURT SETTLEMENTS 
Article 58 
1. 
An authentic instrument which is enforceable in the 
Member State of origin shall be enforceable in the other 
Member States without any declaration of enforceability being 
required. Enforcement of the authentic instrument may be 
refused only if such enforcement is manifestly contrary to 
public policy (ordre public) in the Member State addressed. 
The provisions of Section 2, Subsection 2 of Section 3, and 
Section 4 of Chapter III shall apply as appropriate to authentic 
instruments. 
2. 
The authentic instrument produced must satisfy the 
conditions necessary to establish its authenticity in the 
Member State of origin. 
Article 59 
A court settlement which is enforceable in the Member State of 
origin shall be enforced in the other Member States under the 
same conditions as authentic instruments. 
Article 60 
The competent authority or court of the Member State of origin 
shall, at the request of any interested party, issue the certificate 
using the form set out in Annex II containing a summary of the 
enforceable obligation recorded in the authentic instrument or 
of the agreement between the parties recorded in the court 
settlement. 
CHAPTER V 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Article 61 
No legalisation or other similar formality shall be required for 
documents issued in a Member State in the context of this 
Regulation.
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/17
Article 62 
1. 
In order to determine whether a party is domiciled in the 
Member State whose courts are seised of a matter, the court 
shall apply its internal law. 
2. 
If a party is not domiciled in the Member State whose 
courts are seised of the matter, then, in order to determine 
whether the party is domiciled in another Member State, the 
court shall apply the law of that Member State. 
Article 63 
1. 
For the purposes of this Regulation, a company or other 
legal person or association of natural or legal persons is 
domiciled at the place where it has its: 
(a) statutory seat; 
(b) central administration; or 
(c) principal place of business. 
2. 
For the purposes of Ireland, Cyprus and the United 
Kingdom, ‘statutory seat’ means the registered office or, where 
there is no such office anywhere, the place of incorporation or, 
where there is no such place anywhere, the place under the law 
of which the formation took place. 
3. 
In order to determine whether a trust is domiciled in the 
Member State whose courts are seised of the matter, the court 
shall apply its rules of private international law. 
Article 64 
Without prejudice to any more favourable provisions of 
national laws, persons domiciled in a Member State who are 
being prosecuted in the criminal courts of another Member 
State of which they are not nationals for an offence which 
was not intentionally committed may be defended by persons 
qualified to do so, even if they do not appear in person. 
However, the court seised of the matter may order appearance 
in person; in the case of failure to appear, a judgment given in 
the civil action without the person concerned having had the 
opportunity to arrange for his defence need not be recognised 
or enforced in the other Member States. 
Article 65 
1. 
The jurisdiction specified in point 2 of Article 8 and 
Article 13 in actions on a warranty or guarantee or in any 
other third-party proceedings may be resorted to in the Member 
States included in the list established by the Commission 
pursuant to point (b) of Article 76(1) and Article 76(2) only 
in so far as permitted under national law. A person domiciled in 
another Member State may be invited to join the proceedings 
before the courts of those Member States pursuant to the rules 
on third-party notice referred to in that list. 
2. 
Judgments given in a Member State by virtue of point 2 of 
Article 8 or Article 13 shall be recognised and enforced in 
accordance with Chapter III in any other Member State. Any 
effects which judgments given in the Member States included in 
the list referred to in paragraph 1 may have, in accordance with 
the law of those Member States, on third parties by application 
of paragraph 1 shall be recognised in all Member States. 
3. 
The Member States included in the list referred to in 
paragraph 1 shall, within the framework of the European 
Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters established 
by Council Decision 2001/470/EC ( 1 ) (‘the European Judicial 
Network’) provide information on how to determine, in 
accordance with their national law, the effects of the 
judgments referred to in the second sentence of paragraph 2. 
CHAPTER VI 
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 
Article 66 
1. 
This Regulation shall apply only to legal proceedings insti­
tuted, to authentic instruments formally drawn up or registered 
and to court settlements approved or concluded on or after 
10 January 2015. 
2. 
Notwithstanding Article 80, Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 
shall continue to apply to judgments given in legal proceedings 
instituted, to authentic instruments formally drawn up or 
registered and to court settlements approved or concluded 
before 10 January 2015 which fall within the scope of that 
Regulation. 
CHAPTER VII 
RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER INSTRUMENTS 
Article 67 
This Regulation shall not prejudice the application of provisions 
governing jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of 
judgments in specific matters which are contained in 
instruments of the Union or in national legislation harmonised 
pursuant to such instruments.
EN 
L 351/18 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012 
( 1 ) OJ L 174, 27.6.2001, p. 25.
Article 68 
1. 
This Regulation shall, as between the Member States, 
supersede the 1968 Brussels Convention, except as regards 
the territories of the Member States which fall within the terri­
torial scope of that Convention and which are excluded from 
this Regulation pursuant to Article 355 of the TFEU. 
2. 
In so far as this Regulation replaces the provisions of the 
1968 Brussels Convention between the Member States, any 
reference to that Convention shall be understood as a 
reference to this Regulation. 
Article 69 
Subject to Articles 70 and 71, this Regulation shall, as between 
the Member States, supersede the conventions that cover the 
same matters as those to which this Regulation applies. In 
particular, the conventions included in the list established by 
the Commission pursuant to point (c) of Article 76(1) and 
Article 76(2) shall be superseded. 
Article 70 
1. 
The conventions referred to in Article 69 shall continue to 
have effect in relation to matters to which this Regulation does 
not apply. 
2. 
They shall continue to have effect in respect of judgments 
given, authentic instruments formally drawn up or registered 
and court settlements approved or concluded before the date 
of entry into force of Regulation (EC) No 44/2001. 
Article 71 
1. 
This Regulation shall not affect any conventions to which 
the Member States are parties and which, in relation to 
particular matters, govern jurisdiction or the recognition or 
enforcement of judgments. 
2. 
With a view to its uniform interpretation, paragraph 1 
shall be applied in the following manner: 
(a) this Regulation shall not prevent a court of a Member State 
which is party to a convention on a particular matter from 
assuming jurisdiction in accordance with that convention, 
even where the defendant is domiciled in another Member 
State which is not party to that convention. The court 
hearing the action shall, in any event, apply Article 28 of 
this Regulation; 
(b) judgments given in a Member State by a court in the 
exercise of jurisdiction provided for in a convention on a 
particular matter shall be recognised and enforced in the 
other Member States in accordance with this Regulation. 
Where a convention on a particular matter to which both the 
Member State of origin and the Member State addressed are 
parties lays down conditions for the recognition or enforcement 
of judgments, those conditions shall apply. In any event, the 
provisions of this Regulation on recognition and enforcement 
of judgments may be applied. 
Article 72 
This Regulation shall not affect agreements by which Member 
States, prior to the entry into force of Regulation (EC) 
No 44/2001, undertook pursuant to Article 59 of the 1968 
Brussels Convention not to recognise judgments given, in 
particular in other Contracting States to that Convention, 
against defendants domiciled or habitually resident in a third 
State where, in cases provided for in Article 4 of that 
Convention, the judgment could only be founded on a 
ground of jurisdiction specified in the second paragraph of 
Article 3 of that Convention. 
Article 73 
1. 
This Regulation shall not affect the application of the 
2007 Lugano Convention. 
2. 
This Regulation shall not affect the application of the 
1958 New York Convention. 
3. 
This Regulation shall not affect the application of bilateral 
conventions and agreements between a third State and a 
Member State concluded before the date of entry into force 
of Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 which concern matters 
governed by this Regulation. 
CHAPTER VIII 
FINAL PROVISIONS 
Article 74 
The Member States shall provide, within the framework of the 
European Judicial Network and with a view to making the 
information available to the public, a description of national 
rules and procedures concerning enforcement, including auth­
orities competent for enforcement, and information on any 
limitations on enforcement, in particular debtor protection 
rules and limitation or prescription periods. 
The Member States shall keep this information permanently 
updated.
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/19
Article 75 
By 10 January 2014, the Member States shall communicate to 
the Commission: 
(a) the courts to which the application for refusal of 
enforcement is to be submitted pursuant to Article 47(1); 
(b) the courts with which an appeal against the decision on the 
application for refusal of enforcement is to be lodged 
pursuant to Article 49(2); 
(c) the courts with which any further appeal is to be lodged 
pursuant to Article 50; and 
(d) the languages accepted for translations of the forms as 
referred to in Article 57(2). 
The Commission shall make the information publicly available 
through any appropriate means, in particular through the 
European Judicial Network. 
Article 76 
1. 
The Member States shall notify the Commission of: 
(a) the rules of jurisdiction referred to in Articles 5(2) and 6(2); 
(b) the rules on third-party notice referred to in Article 65; and 
(c) the conventions referred to in Article 69. 
2. 
The Commission shall, on the basis of the notifications by 
the Member States referred to in paragraph 1, establish the 
corresponding lists. 
3. 
The Member States shall notify the Commission of any 
subsequent amendments required to be made to those lists. The 
Commission shall amend those lists accordingly. 
4. 
The Commission shall publish the lists and any 
subsequent amendments made to them in the Official Journal 
of the European Union. 
5. 
The Commission shall make all information notified 
pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 3 publicly available through 
any other appropriate means, in particular through the 
European Judicial Network. 
Article 77 
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in 
accordance with Article 78 concerning the amendment of 
Annexes I and II. 
Article 78 
1. 
The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the 
Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article. 
2. 
The power to adopt delegated acts referred to in Article 77 
shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate 
period of time from 9 January 2013. 
3. 
The delegation of power referred to in Article 77 may be 
revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the 
Council. A decision to revoke shall put an end to the delegation 
of the power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the 
day following the publication of the decision in the Official 
Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified 
therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts 
already in force. 
4. 
As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall 
notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the 
Council. 
5. 
A delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 77 shall enter 
into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the 
European Parliament or the Council within a period of two 
months of notification of that act to the European Parliament 
and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the 
European Parliament and the Council have both informed the 
Commission that they will not object. That period shall be 
extended by two months at the initiative of the European 
Parliament or of the Council. 
Article 79 
By 11 January 2022 the Commission shall present a report to 
the European Parliament, to the Council and to the European 
Economic and Social Committee on the application of this 
Regulation. That report shall include an evaluation of the 
possible need for a further extension of the rules on jurisdiction 
to defendants not domiciled in a Member State, taking into 
account the operation of this Regulation and possible devel­
opments at international level. Where appropriate, the report 
shall be accompanied by a proposal for amendment of this 
Regulation. 
Article 80 
This Regulation shall repeal Regulation (EC) No 44/2001. 
References to the repealed Regulation shall be construed as 
references to this Regulation and shall be read in accordance 
with the correlation table set out in Annex III.
EN 
L 351/20 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
Article 81 
This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official 
Journal of the European Union. 
It shall apply from 10 January 2015, with the exception of Articles 75 and 76, which shall apply from 
10 January 2014. 
This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in the Member States in 
accordance with the Treaties. 
Done at Strasbourg, 12 December 2012. 
For the European Parliament 
The President 
M. SCHULZ 
For the Council 
The President 
A. D. MAVROYIANNIS
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/21
ANNEX I
EN 
L 351/22 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/23
EN 
L 351/24 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/25
ANNEX II
EN 
L 351/26 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/27
EN 
L 351/28 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
ANNEX III 
CORRELATION TABLE 
Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 
This Regulation 
Article 1(1) 
Article 1(1) 
Article 1(2), introductory words 
Article 1(2), introductory words 
Article 1(2) point (a) 
Article 1(2), points (a) and (f) 
Article 1(2), points (b) to (d) 
Article 1(2), points (b) to (d) 
— 
Article 1(2), point (e) 
Article 1(3) 
— 
— 
Article 2 
Article 2 
Article 4 
Article 3 
Article 5 
Article 4 
Article 6 
Article 5, introductory words 
Article 7, introductory words 
Article 5, point (1) 
Article 7, point (1) 
Article 5, point (2) 
— 
Article 5, points (3) and (4) 
Article 7, points (2) and (3) 
— 
Article 7, point (4) 
Article 5, points (5) to (7) 
Article 7, points (5) to (7) 
Article 6 
Article 8 
Article 7 
Article 9 
Article 8 
Article 10 
Article 9 
Article 11 
Article 10 
Article 12 
Article 11 
Article 13 
Article 12 
Article 14 
Article 13 
Article 15 
Article 14 
Article 16 
Article 15 
Article 17 
Article 16 
Article 18 
Article 17 
Article 19 
Article 18 
Article 20 
Article 19, points (1) and (2) 
Article 21(1) 
— 
Article 21(2) 
Article 20 
Article 22 
Article 21 
Article 23 
Article 22 
Article 24 
Article 23(1) and (2) 
Article 25(1) and (2)
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/29
Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 
This Regulation 
Article 23(3) 
— 
Article 23(4) and (5) 
Article 25(3) and (4) 
— 
Article 25(5) 
Article 24 
Article 26(1) 
— 
Article 26(2) 
Article 25 
Article 27 
Article 26 
Article 28 
Article 27(1) 
Article 29(1) 
— 
Article 29(2) 
Article 27(2) 
Article 29(3) 
Article 28 
Article 30 
Article 29 
Article 31(1) 
— 
Article 31(2) 
— 
Article 31(3) 
— 
Article 31(4) 
Article 30 
Article 32(1), points (a) and (b) 
— 
Article 32(1), second subparagraph 
— 
Article 32(2) 
— 
Article 33 
— 
Article 34 
Article 31 
Article 35 
Article 32 
Article 2, point (a) 
Article 33 
Article 36 
— 
Article 37 
— 
Article 39 
— 
Article 40 
— 
Article 41 
— 
Article 42 
— 
Article 43 
— 
Article 44 
Article 34 
Article 45(1), points (a) to (d) 
Article 35(1) 
Article 45(1), point (e) 
Article 35(2) 
Article 45(2) 
Article 35(3) 
Article 45(3) 
— 
Article 45(4) 
Article 36 
Article 52 
Article 37(1) 
Article 38, point (a) 
Article 38 
—
EN 
L 351/30 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 
This Regulation 
Article 39 
— 
Article 40 
— 
Article 41 
— 
Article 42 
— 
Article 43 
— 
Article 44 
— 
Article 45 
— 
Article 46 
— 
Article 47 
— 
Article 48 
— 
— 
Article 46 
— 
Article 47 
— 
Article 48 
— 
Article 49 
— 
Article 50 
— 
Article 51 
— 
Article 54 
Article 49 
Article 55 
Article 50 
— 
Article 51 
Article 56 
Article 52 
— 
Article 53 
— 
Article 54 
Article 53 
Article 55(1) 
— 
Article 55(2) 
Article 37(2), Article 47(3) and Article 57 
Article 56 
Article 61 
Article 57(1) 
Article 58(1) 
Article 57(2) 
— 
Article 57(3) 
Article 58(2) 
Article 57(4) 
Article 60 
Article 58 
Article 59 and Article 60 
Article 59 
Article 62 
Article 60 
Article 63 
Article 61 
Article 64 
Article 62 
Article 3 
Article 63 
— 
Article 64 
— 
Article 65 
Article 65(1) and (2)
EN 
20.12.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 351/31
Regulation (EC) No 44/2001 
This Regulation 
— 
Article 65(3) 
Article 66 
Article 66 
Article 67 
Article 67 
Article 68 
Article 68 
Article 69 
Article 69 
Article 70 
Article 70 
Article 71 
Article 71 
Article 72 
Article 72 
— 
Article 73 
Article 73 
Article 79 
Article 74(1) 
Article 75, first paragraph, points (a), (b) and (c), and 
Article 76(1), point (a) 
Article 74(2) 
Article 77 
— 
Article 78 
— 
Article 80 
Article 75 
— 
Article 76 
Article 81 
Annex I 
Article 76(1), point (a) 
Annex II 
Article 75, point (a) 
Annex III 
Article 75, point (b) 
Annex IV 
Article 75, point (c) 
Annex V 
Annex I and Annex II 
Annex VI 
Annex II 
— 
Annex III
EN 
L 351/32 
Official Journal of the European Union 
20.12.2012
