I 
(Legislative acts) 
REGULATIONS 
REGULATION (EU) No 386/2012 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 
of 19 April 2012 
on entrusting the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) with 
tasks related to the enforcement of intellectual property rights, including the assembling of public 
and private-sector representatives as a European Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual 
Property Rights 
(Text with EEA relevance) 
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE 
EUROPEAN UNION, 
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union, and in particular Article 114 and the first paragraph of 
Article 118 thereof, 
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, 
After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national 
parliaments, 
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and 
Social Committee ( 1 ), 
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure ( 2 ), 
Whereas: 
(1) 
The economic well-being of the Union relies on sustained 
creativity and innovation. Therefore, measures for their 
effective protection are indispensable in ensuring its 
future prosperity. 
(2) 
Intellectual property rights are vital business assets that 
help to ensure that creators and innovators get a fair 
return for their work and that their investment in 
research and new ideas is protected. 
(3) 
A sound, harmonised and progressive approach to intel­
lectual property rights is fundamental in the endeavour 
to fulfil the ambitions of the Europe 2020 Strategy 
including A Digital Agenda for Europe. 
(4) 
The constant increase in infringements of intellectual 
property rights constitutes a genuine threat not only to 
the Union economy, but also, in many cases, to the 
health and safety of Union consumers. Therefore, 
effective, immediate and coordinated action at national, 
European and global levels is needed to successfully 
combat this phenomenon. 
(5) 
In the context of the overall intellectual property rights 
strategy envisaged by the Council Resolution of 
25 September 2008 on a comprehensive European 
anti-counterfeiting and anti-piracy plan ( 3 ), the Council 
called on the Commission to set up a European 
Observatory 
on 
Counterfeiting 
and 
Piracy. 
The 
Commission therefore formed a network of experts 
from the public and the private sectors and described 
the tasks of that network in its Communication 
entitled ‘Enhancing the enforcement of intellectual 
property rights in the internal market’. The name of 
the European Observatory on Counterfeiting and Piracy 
should be changed to the European Observatory 
on Infringements of Intellectual Property Rights (‘the 
Observatory’).
EN 
16.5.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 129/1 
( 1 ) OJ C 376, 22.12.2011, p. 62. 
( 2 ) Position of the European Parliament of 14 February 2012 (not yet 
published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 
22 March 2012 (not yet published in the Official Journal). 
( 3 ) OJ C 253, 4.10.2008, p. 1.
(6) 
That Communication stated that the Observatory should 
serve as the central resource for gathering, monitoring 
and reporting information and data related to all 
infringements of intellectual property rights. It should 
be used as a platform for cooperation between represen­
tatives from national authorities and stakeholders to 
exchange ideas and expertise on best practices and 
make recommendations to policymakers for joint 
enforcement strategies. The Communication specified 
that the Observatory would be hosted and managed by 
the services of the Commission. 
(7) 
In its Resolution of 1 March 2010 on the enforcement of 
intellectual property rights in the internal market ( 1 ), the 
Council invited the Commission, the Member States and 
industry to provide the Observatory with available 
reliable and comparable data on counterfeiting and 
piracy and to jointly develop and agree, in the context 
of the Observatory, on plans to collect further 
information. The Council also invited the Observatory 
to publish each year a comprehensive annual report 
covering the scope, scale and principal characteristics of 
counterfeiting and piracy as well as its impact on the 
internal market. That annual report should be prepared 
using the relevant information provided in that regard by 
the authorities of the Member States, the Commission 
and the private sector within the limits of data protection 
law. The Council also recognised the importance of 
developing new competitive business models enlarging 
the legal offer of cultural and creative content and at 
the same time preventing and combating infringements 
of intellectual property rights as necessary means for 
fostering economic growth, employment and cultural 
diversity. 
(8) 
In its Conclusions of 25 May 2010 on the future revision 
of the Trade Mark system in the European Union ( 2 ), the 
Council called on the Commission to establish a legal 
basis for the involvement of the Office for Harmon­
ization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and 
Designs) (‘the Office’) in enforcement-related activities, 
including the fight against counterfeiting, in particular 
through fostering its cooperation with the national 
trade mark offices and the Observatory. In that respect, 
Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 29 April 2004 on the enforcement of 
intellectual property rights ( 3 ) provides, inter alia, for 
certain measures to promote cooperation, including the 
exchange of information, among Member States and 
between Member States and the Commission. 
(9) 
In its Recommendation of 26 March 2009 on 
strengthening security and fundamental freedoms on 
the internet ( 4 ), the European Parliament recommended 
that the Council preserve full and safe access to the 
internet while encouraging private/public cooperation in 
enhancing law enforcement cooperation. 
(10) 
In its Resolution of 22 September 2010 on enforcement 
of intellectual property rights in the internal market ( 5 ), 
the European Parliament called on the Member States 
and the Commission to extend the cooperation 
between the Office and national intellectual property 
offices so as to include the fight against infringements 
of intellectual property rights. 
(11) 
In its Resolution of 12 May 2011 on unlocking the 
potential of cultural and creative industries ( 6 ), the 
European Parliament urged the Commission to take 
into account the specific problems encountered by 
small and medium-sized enterprises when it comes to 
asserting their intellectual property rights and to 
promote best practice and effective methods to respect 
those rights. 
(12) 
In its Resolution of 6 July 2011 on a comprehensive 
approach on personal data protection in the European 
Union ( 7 ), the European Parliament called on the 
Commission to ensure full harmonisation and legal 
certainty, providing a uniform and high level of 
protection of individuals in all circumstances. 
(13) 
In view of the range of tasks assigned to the Observatory, 
a solution is needed to ensure an adequate and 
sustainable infrastructure for the fulfilment of its tasks. 
(14) 
Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 of 26 February 
2009 on the Community trade mark ( 8 ) provides for 
administrative cooperation between the Office and the 
courts or authorities of the Member States, and the 
exchange of publications between the Office and the 
central industrial property offices of the Member States. 
On that basis, the Office has established cooperation with 
national offices that are active in the field of protection 
of intellectual property rights. Consequently, the Office 
already possesses, to a considerable extent, the necessary 
experience and expertise to provide an adequate and 
sustainable infrastructure in the field of the Observatory’s 
tasks. 
(15) 
The Office is therefore well placed to be entrusted with 
carrying out those tasks. 
(16) 
Those tasks should relate to all intellectual property 
rights covered by Directive 2004/48/EC, since in many 
cases, infringing acts affect a bundle of intellectual 
property rights. Furthermore, data and the exchange of 
best practices are needed on the entire abovementioned 
range of intellectual property rights, in order to obtain a 
complete picture of the situation and to enable compre­
hensive strategies to be devised with a view to reducing 
infringements of intellectual property rights.
EN 
L 129/2 
Official Journal of the European Union 
16.5.2012 
( 1 ) OJ C 56, 6.3.2010, p. 1. 
( 2 ) OJ C 140, 29.5.2010, p. 22. 
( 3 ) OJ L 157, 30.4.2004, p. 45. Corrected version in OJ L 195, 
2.6.2004, p. 16. 
( 4 ) OJ C 117 E, 6.5.2010, p. 206. 
( 5 ) OJ C 50 E, 21.2.2012, p. 48. 
( 6 ) Not yet published in the Official Journal. 
( 7 ) Not yet published in the Official Journal. 
( 8 ) OJ L 78, 24.3.2009, p. 1.
(17) 
The tasks that the Office should carry out can be linked 
to the enforcement and reporting measures laid down by 
Directive 2004/48/EC. Thus, the Office should provide 
services to national authorities or operators which 
affect, in particular, the homogenous implementation of 
the Directive and which are likely to facilitate its appli­
cation. The Office’s tasks should therefore be considered 
as closely linked to the subject matter of acts approxi­
mating 
the 
laws, 
regulations 
and 
administrative 
provisions of the Member States. 
(18) 
Assembled by the Office, the Observatory should become 
a centre of excellence on information and data relating to 
infringements of intellectual property rights, by bene­
fiting from the Office’s expertise, experience and 
resources. 
(19) 
The Office should offer a forum that brings together 
public authorities and the private sector, ensuring the 
collection, 
analysis 
and 
dissemination 
of 
relevant 
objective, comparable and reliable data regarding the 
value of intellectual property rights and infringements 
of 
those 
rights, 
identifying 
and 
promoting 
best 
practices and strategies to enforce intellectual property 
rights, and raising public awareness of the impact of 
infringements of intellectual property rights. Furthermore, 
the Office should fulfil additional tasks, such as 
improving the understanding of the value of intellectual 
property rights, fostering the exchange of information on 
new competitive business models which enlarge the legal 
offer of cultural and creative content, enhancing the 
expertise of persons involved in the enforcement of intel­
lectual property rights by appropriate training measures, 
increasing knowledge of techniques to prevent counter­
feiting, and improving cooperation with third countries 
and international organisations. The Commission should 
be associated with the activities undertaken by the Office 
under this Regulation. 
(20) 
The Office should thus facilitate and support the activities 
of national authorities, the private sector and the Union 
institutions relating to the enforcement of intellectual 
property rights and in particular their activities in the 
fight against infringements of those rights. The exercise 
by the Office of its powers under this Regulation does 
not prevent Member States from exercising their com­
petences. The Office’s tasks and activities under this 
Regulation do not extend to participation in individual 
operations or investigations carried out by the competent 
authorities. 
(21) 
In order to fulfil those tasks in the most efficient manner, 
the Office should consult and cooperate with other auth­
orities at national, European and, where appropriate, 
international levels, create synergies with the activities 
carried out by such authorities and avoid any duplication 
of measures. 
(22) 
The Office should implement the tasks and activities 
relating to the enforcement of intellectual property 
rights by making use of its own budgetary means. 
(23) 
With regard to representatives of the private sector, the 
Office should, when assembling the Observatory in the 
context of its activities, involve a representative selection 
of the economic sectors — including the creative 
industries — most concerned by or most experienced 
in the fight against infringements of intellectual 
property rights, in particular representatives of right 
holders, including authors and other creators, as well as 
internet intermediaries. Also, a proper representation of 
consumers and of small and medium-sized enterprises 
should be ensured. 
(24) 
The information obligations imposed by this Regulation 
on the Member States and on the private sector should 
not create unnecessary administrative burdens and should 
endeavour to avoid duplication as regards data already 
provided by Member States and private-sector represen­
tatives to Union institutions under existing Union 
reporting requirements. 
(25) 
Since the objective of this Regulation, namely to entrust 
the Office with tasks related to the enforcement of intel­
lectual property rights, cannot be sufficiently achieved by 
the Member States and can therefore, by reason of its 
effect, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may 
adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of 
subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on 
European Union. In accordance with the principle of 
proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation 
does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve 
that objective, 
HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION: 
Article 1 
Subject matter and scope 
This Regulation entrusts the Office for Harmonization in the 
Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (‘the Office’) with 
tasks aimed at facilitating and supporting the activities of 
national authorities, the private sector and the Union insti­
tutions in the fight against infringements of the intellectual 
property rights covered by Directive 2004/48/EC. In carrying 
out these tasks the Office shall organise, administer and support 
the gathering of experts, authorities and stakeholders assembled 
under the name ‘European Observatory on Infringements of 
Intellectual Property Rights’ (‘the Observatory’). 
The tasks and activities of the Office under this Regulation do 
not extend to participation in individual operations or investi­
gations carried out by the competent authorities. 
Article 2 
Tasks and activities 
1. 
The Office shall have the following tasks: 
(a) improving understanding of the value of intellectual 
property;
EN 
16.5.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 129/3
(b) improving understanding of the scope and impact of 
infringements of intellectual property rights; 
(c) enhancing knowledge of best public and private sector 
practices to protect intellectual property rights; 
(d) assisting in raising citizens’ awareness of the impact of 
infringements of intellectual property rights; 
(e) enhancing the expertise of persons involved in the 
enforcement of intellectual property rights; 
(f) enhancing knowledge of technical tools to prevent and 
tackle 
infringements 
of 
intellectual 
property 
rights, 
including tracking and tracing systems which help to 
distinguish genuine products from counterfeit ones; 
(g) providing mechanisms which help to improve the online 
exchange, between Member States’ authorities working in 
the field of intellectual property rights, of information 
relating to the enforcement of such rights, and fostering 
cooperation with and between those authorities; 
(h) working, in consultation with Member States, to foster 
international cooperation with intellectual property offices 
in third countries so as to build strategies and develop tech­
niques, skills and tools for the enforcement of intellectual 
property rights. 
2. 
In the fulfilment of the tasks set out in paragraph 1, the 
Office shall carry out the following activities in accordance with 
the work programme adopted pursuant to Article 7, and in line 
with Union law: 
(a) establishing a transparent methodology for the collection, 
analysis 
and 
reporting 
of 
independent, 
objective, 
comparable and reliable data relating to infringements of 
intellectual property rights; 
(b) collecting, analysing and disseminating relevant objective, 
comparable and reliable data regarding infringements of 
intellectual property rights; 
(c) collecting, analysing and disseminating relevant objective, 
comparable and reliable data regarding the economic 
value of intellectual property and its contribution to 
economic growth, welfare, innovation, creativity, cultural 
diversity, the creation of high-quality jobs and the devel­
opment of high quality products and services within the 
Union; 
(d) providing regular assessments and specific reports by 
economic sector, geographic area and type of intellectual 
property right infringed, which evaluate, inter alia, the 
impact of infringements of intellectual property rights on 
society and the economy, including an assessment of the 
effects on small and medium-sized enterprises, as well as 
on health, the environment, safety and security; 
(e) collecting, 
analysing 
and 
disseminating 
information 
regarding best practices between the representatives 
meeting as the Observatory, and, if applicable, making 
recommendations for strategies based on such practices; 
(f) 
drawing up reports and publications to raise awareness 
amongst Union citizens of the impact of infringements of 
intellectual property rights and to that end, organising 
conferences, events and meetings at European and inter­
national levels as well as assisting national and Europe- 
wide actions, including online and offline campaigns, prin­
cipally by providing data and information; 
(g) monitoring the development of new competitive business 
models which enlarge the legal offer of cultural and creative 
content, and encouraging the exchange of information and 
raising consumer awareness in this respect; 
(h) developing and organising online and other forms of 
training for national officials involved in the protection 
of intellectual property rights; 
(i) 
organising ad hoc meetings of experts, including academic 
experts and relevant representatives of civil society, to 
support its work under this Regulation; 
(j) 
identifying and promoting technical tools for professionals 
and benchmark techniques, including tracking and tracing 
systems which help to distinguish genuine products from 
counterfeit ones; 
(k) working with national authorities and the Commission to 
develop an online network facilitating the exchange of 
information on infringements of intellectual property 
rights between public administrations, bodies and organi­
sations in the Member States dealing with the protection 
and enforcement of those rights; 
(l) 
working in cooperation with, and building synergies 
between, the central industrial property offices of the 
Member States, including the Benelux Office for Intellectual 
Property and other Member States’ authorities working in 
the field of intellectual property rights, with a view to 
developing and promoting techniques, skills and tools 
relating to the enforcement of intellectual property rights, 
including training programmes and awareness campaigns; 
(m) developing, in consultation with the Member States, 
programmes for the provision of technical assistance to 
third countries as well as developing and delivering 
specific training programmes and events for officials from 
third countries who are involved in the protection of intel­
lectual property rights;
EN 
L 129/4 
Official Journal of the European Union 
16.5.2012
(n) making recommendations to the Commission on issues 
falling within the scope of this Regulation, on the basis 
of a request from the Commission; 
(o) carrying out similar activities necessary in order to enable 
the Office to fulfil the tasks set out in paragraph 1. 
3. 
In carrying out the tasks and activities referred to in para­
graphs 1 and 2, the Office shall comply with existing provisions 
of Union law on data protection. 
Article 3 
Financing 
The Office shall at all times ensure that the activities entrusted 
to it by this Regulation are carried out by making use of its 
own budgetary means. 
Article 4 
Meetings of the Observatory 
1. 
In order to carry out the activities referred to in 
Article 2(2), the Office shall at least once per year invite to 
meetings of the Observatory representatives from public admin­
istrations, bodies and organisations in the Member States 
dealing with intellectual property rights and representatives 
from the private sector, for the purpose of their participation 
in the Office’s work under this Regulation. 
2. 
Private-sector representatives invited to meetings of the 
Observatory shall include a broad, representative and balanced 
range of Union and national bodies representing the different 
economic sectors, including the creative industries, most 
concerned by or most experienced in the fight against 
infringements of intellectual property rights. 
Consumer organisations, small and medium-sized enterprises, 
authors and other creators shall be properly represented. 
3. 
The Office shall invite each Member State to send at least 
one representative from its public administration to meetings of 
the Observatory. In that context, Member States shall ensure 
continuity in the Observatory’s work. 
4. 
The meetings referred to in paragraph 1 may be comple­
mented by working groups within the Observatory made up of 
representatives from Member States and representatives from 
the private sector. 
5. 
Where appropriate, and in addition to the meetings 
referred to in paragraph 1, the Office shall organise meetings 
consisting of: 
(a) representatives from the public administrations, bodies and 
organisations in the Member States; or 
(b) private-sector representatives. 
6. 
Members or other representatives of the European 
Parliament and representatives from the Commission shall be 
invited to any of the meetings covered by this Article, either as 
participants or observers, as appropriate. 
7. 
The names of the representatives attending, the agenda 
and the minutes of the meetings referred to in this Article 
shall be published on the Office’s website. 
Article 5 
Information obligations 
1. 
As appropriate, in accordance with national law, including 
the law governing the processing of personal data, Member 
States shall, at the request of the Office or on their own initi­
ative: 
(a) inform the Office of their overall policies and strategies on 
the enforcement of intellectual property rights and any 
changes thereto; 
(b) provide available statistical data on infringements of intel­
lectual property rights; 
(c) inform the Office of important case-law. 
2. 
Without prejudice to the law governing the processing of 
personal data and to the protection of confidential information, 
private-sector representatives meeting as the Observatory shall, 
when possible, at the request of the Office: 
(a) inform the Office of policies and strategies in their field of 
activity on the enforcement of intellectual property rights 
and any changes thereto; 
(b) provide statistical data on infringements of intellectual 
property rights in their field of activity. 
Article 6 
The Office 
1. 
The relevant provisions of Title XII of Regulation (EC) 
No 207/2009 shall apply to the carrying-out of the tasks and 
activities provided for under this Regulation. 
2. 
Using the powers conferred by Article 124 of Regulation 
(EC) No 207/2009, the President of the Office shall adopt the 
internal administrative instructions and shall publish the notices 
that are necessary for the fulfilment of all the tasks entrusted to 
the Office by this Regulation.
EN 
16.5.2012 
Official Journal of the European Union 
L 129/5
Article 7 
Content of the work programme and of the management 
report 
1. 
The Office shall draw up an annual work programme that 
appropriately prioritises the activities under this Regulation and 
for the meetings of the Observatory, in line with the Union’s 
policies and priorities in the field of protection of intellectual 
property rights and in cooperation with the representatives 
referred to in point (a) of Article 4(5). 
2. 
The work programme referred to in paragraph 1 shall be 
submitted to the Office’s Administrative Board for information. 
3. 
The management report provided for in point (d) of 
Article 124(2) of Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 shall contain 
at least the following information concerning the Office’s tasks 
and activities under this Regulation: 
(a) a review of the main activities carried out during the 
preceding calendar year; 
(b) the results achieved during the preceding calendar year, 
accompanied, where appropriate, by sectoral reports 
analysing the situation in the different industry and 
product sectors; 
(c) an overall assessment of the fulfilment of the Office’s tasks 
as provided for in this Regulation and in the work 
programme drawn up in accordance with paragraph 1; 
(d) an overview of the activities that the Office intends to 
undertake in the future; 
(e) observations on the enforcement of intellectual property 
rights 
and 
potential 
future 
policies 
and 
strategies, 
including on how to enhance effective cooperation with 
and between Member States; 
(f) an overall assessment of the proper representation in the 
Observatory of all the actors mentioned in Article 4(2). 
Before submitting the management report to the European 
Parliament, the Commission and the Administrative Board, the 
President of the Office shall consult the representatives referred 
to in point (a) of Article 4(5) on the relevant parts of the report. 
Article 8 
Evaluation 
1. 
The Commission shall adopt a report evaluating the appli­
cation of this Regulation by 6 June 2017. 
2. 
The evaluation report shall assess the operation of this 
Regulation, in particular as regards its impact on the 
enforcement of intellectual property rights in the internal 
market. 
3. 
The Commission shall, when preparing the evaluation 
report, consult the Office, the Member States and the represen­
tatives meeting as the Observatory on the issues referred to in 
paragraph 2. 
4. 
The Commission shall transmit the evaluation report to 
the European Parliament, the Council and the European 
Economic and Social Committee and shall undertake a broad 
consultation among stakeholders on the evaluation report. 
Article 9 
Entry into force 
This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day 
following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the 
European Union. 
This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States. 
Done at Strasbourg, 19 April 2012. 
For the European Parliament 
The President 
M. SCHULZ 
For the Council 
The President 
M. BØDSKOV
EN 
L 129/6 
Official Journal of the European Union 
16.5.2012
