

Subject: This document describes the procedure for reporting a personal data security breach.
Scope: General Data Protection Regulation.
Normative Reference(s): /


Objective of the procedure
The aim of this internal document is to define a personal data breach in connection with a personal data processing operation.
Definition: 
A personal data breach means the loss of availability, integrity or confidentiality of personal data, whether accidentally or unlawfully, during processing of the data by the company.

A breach of personal data due to a company's carelessness and negligence when processing such data now carries a direct and heavy penalty including criminal sanctions.
 
The internal procedure
Step-by-step approach:	
All MANE Group employees, customers, suppliers,  subcontractors, service providers and other partners or contractors who become aware of a breach of the obligations arising from the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) must notify directly and immediately the Group's Data Protection Officer (DPO) Julie Royo-Renaudin (SJPI) at the email address dpo@mane.com or the relevant DP Coordinator who will forward the information immediately to the DPO.

Any such notifications to the DPO at the email addressdpo@mane.com shall at least: 

Communicate the name and contact details of the person reporting the alleged breach or those of another contact point where more information can be obtained;
Communicate the name of the personal data processing operation concerned;
Communicate the name of the data controller and the relevant department and entity within the Group;
Describe the nature of the personal data breach, including the categories and approximate number of persons involved in the breach;
Describe the likely consequences of the personal data breach;
Describe the measures taken or that should be taken to address the personal data breach or to mitigate its adverse effects.










The DPO shall inform the Information Systems Director (ISD) of the breach by email without delay. 
The DPO and the ISD shall convene the employees concerned for preliminary implementation of the compliance actions and a decision on what further course of action to take.


Characterisation of the breach

Crisis management priority actions


If the breach is confirmed, the DPO will inform the CNIL and the data subjects concerned.
The MANE Group's DPO shall take all the necessary measures to notify the breach in question to the supervisory authority (CNIL) not later than 72 hours after having become aware of it, unless the breach is unlikely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the natural persons concerned. 

The CNIL has supervisory powers and the convictions handed down by it may be published on its website and given regular media coverage.

The DPO will maintain and update the register of breaches.




Personal data processing operation concerned/Nature of the personal data concerned

Human or computer error

External malice

Nature of the breach (loss of availability, integrity or confidentiality)

Date and time of the breach

Use of a processor




Convening the crisis unit

Analysis of the causes and consequences of the incident

Reconstruction and remedial plan Determining immediate technical measures

Gathering and preservation of evidence in case of an attack or malicious activity

Notification of CNIL within 72 hours maximum

Notification of the data subjects concerned

Notification of insurance

Complaint mechanisms


