YOUSIGN 
Electronic signature software for authorized MANE signatories

Definition 
YOUSIGN is an electronic signature service online fully compliant with the European Regulation 910/2014 and recognized worldwide:
eIDAS certifications (electronic IDentification, Authentication and trust Services);
listed among the European Commission’s global trusted third-party providers. 
Features
Legal and secure signature platform, validated by the Legal & IP Department, which authenticates signatories by e-mail and SMS code, stores signed documents, and establishes proof of their signatures by time stamping:
Legal value of the electronic signature identical to an original signature;
Accessible on any device connected to Internet, and for 10 years after the end of the license;
Signature and initials of documents in PDF format;
Interface languages available: English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Italian and Dutch.
Mandatory information on the document prior to signature (verify accuracy/complete)
Company name of the party (s)
Name and title of each signatory
Signatories
MANE’s signatories must be authorized to sign (by virtue of company articles of association or delegation of power).
Information to provide (can be saved once and for all by the user) for each signatory (external as well as MANE) appearing on the document:
Surname
First name
Title
Professional e-mail
Mobile phone number
Settings
Save by default as template(s) to use (template to create in each language used):
21 days for the signature deadline. * 
Automatic reminders every two days. 
Active the consent protocol option in the form of a checkbox with the mention “I acknowledge that I have carefully read the document(s) submitted for my signature, accept its content, and I confirm my consent to affix my electronic signature.”
For each document to be signed:
Set the interface language corresponding to the language of the document before starting the process (before creating a “procedure”).
Use the applicable language template, and add:
Initials when the document longer than one page;
The term “Dated…” above each signature if there is no mention of a single signature date;
As “follower” the internal requester (invitation + finalization only).
*shorten the time frame if the document states a short validity date or if urgent
Cost
€ 480 taxes excluded per year per license, for an unlimited number of signatures per user.
	
