PATENT PORTFOLIO 
AUDIT AND 
LICENSING POLICY 
CONFIDENTIAL 
2PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE 01 CONTENT
PORTFOLIO AUDIT 02 
LICENSING OPPORTUNITIES 03 REASONS FOR A LICENSING POLICY 3PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE REASONS FOR A LICENSING POLICY 01
4PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE A. Why a licensing policy? (1/2)
Patents represent an important investment notably financi ally for 
companies, and are considered as intangible asset that are of importance 
in evaluating the value and strength of a company.
Furthermore, generally speaking, less than 10% of a patent p ortfolio 
contribute towards revenues of a company.
Thus, there is a need to find returns on investments (ROI) 
opportunities.REASONS FOR A LICENSING POLICY 5PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE A. Why a licensing policy? (2/2)
Except for protecting the company's products (and by extens ion, its 
revenues), a patent portfolio's returns on investments can be of the 
following nature:
Royalties obtained from licensing out ;
Revenues obtained from selling some of the patents;
Access to third party patents through cross-licensing deals.REASONS FOR A LICENSING POLICY 6PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE PORTFOLIO AUDIT 02
7PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE A. Why a portfolio audit? 
Astrategic portfolio audit enables Mane to strengthen its IP position and to 
identify licensing opportunities.
Particularly, a portfolio audit allows:
To satisfy a general need to know what the company has and wher e the value 
in the portfolio lies;
To identify gaps in protection;
To survey Mane's portfolio for patents that are candidates fo r enforcement 
either by licensing or litigation, or that can/should be sol d.PORTFOLIO AUDIT 8PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE B. Methodology (1/3)
Segment the portfolio to assess it more efficiently:
Either by technology, product, technical standard or by bus iness units;
Example of categorization for MANE's patent portfolio:
Fragrances 
Flavors 
Ingredients PORTFOLIO AUDIT 9PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE B. Methodology (2/3)PORTFOLIO AUDIT 
Unit Flavors Tobacco 
Pet food 
Food/oral care 
Fragrances Consumer 
goods 
Ingredients Naturals 
Synthetics Example of categorization 
of MANE's patent portfolio 10 PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE B. Methodology (3/3)
Review the portfolio category by category, with each business/cat egory 
manager and answer the following question for each patent:
- is the patent exploited Yes/No? - is the patent a core patent? - can the patent technology be exploited in one of Mane's faci lity, 
Yes/No?- is the market adequately served Yes/No? Etc...PORTFOLIO AUDIT 11 PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE C. Extraction and classification (1/2)
After categorization and analysis of the portfolio, we shou ld extract in 
collaboration with Management;
Core patents , i.e., patents essential for Mane because said patents allo w
exploitation of another patent for example;
Defensive patents , i.e., patents that Mane considers as important in view
of its competitors;
Sufficiently exploited patents , i.e. patents that Mane exploits and serve 
adequately the market.
The above patents should not be proposed for licensing 
in/out.PORTFOLIO AUDIT 12 PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE C. Extraction and classification (2/2)
After categorization and analysis of the portfolio, we shou ld extract in 
collaboration with Management;
patent families and/or technology that might be proposed fo r licensing 
out;
patent families and/or technology that might need licensing in ;
In a perspective of ROI, we obtain a list of "patent of interest for licensing-
out". Said patents correspond to non-sufficiently exploited or n ot exploited 
at all patents. Cross-licensing is eventually possible with said patents of 
interest and/or patents of interest for licensing in.PORTFOLIO AUDIT 13 PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE PORTFOLIO AUDIT 
Patent X 
Exploited 
Evaluate 
exploitation 
Non optimal 
exploitation 
Optimal 
exploitation 
Not exploited 
Why? 
Defensive 
patent? 
Core Patent? 
Not exploitable 
because of 
internal reasons 
(tox, process 
issues...)or 
because of 
external reasons 
(no market 
found) 14 PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE D. Asset assessment 
Automated analysis of each patent of interest for licensing-out to ascertain 
a quantitative and qualitative measurement of:
Enforceability;
Intrinsic value for Mane;
Licensing or sale potential.PORTFOLIO AUDIT 15 PATENT PORTFOLIO AUDIT AND LICENSING POLICY 
Confidential | Aminata POUYE 
THANKS! FOR MORE INFORMATION,CONTACT US 
www.mane.com Aminata.POUYE@mane.com Legal and IP Department   
                   MANE GROUP  
 
 
 
CODE OF CONDUCT  
PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION  
 
 
1. Purpose of the Code of Conduct  
 
Its purpose is to implement  consistent and adequate standards across the MANE Group regarding the protection and security of 
personal data in order  to ensure that the applicable data processing and dissemination obligations are met worldwide, in alignment 
with the requirements of the European General Data Protection Regulation ("GDPR").  
 
2. Scope of the Code of Conduct  
 
This Code of Conduct sets common rules applicable to all processing of personal data concerning the MANE Group's employees, 
customers, subcontractors, suppliers, service providers and other partners or contractors.  
 
3. Definitions  
 
 Personal data: any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person.  
 
 Processing of personal data: any operation or set of operations performed on personal data, such as collection, recording, 
organisation, storage, adaptation, alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or 
otherwise making available, alignment or combination, blocking, erasure or destruction.  
 
4. Prerequisites for processing personal data 
 
The MANE Group and its employees undertake to process only personal data collected lawfully and fairly in accordance with the purpose of the data recording and processing which determine both the conditions under which the personal data are collected and 
the rights that ensue.  
 
4.1 Categories of authorised personal data and conditions for processing:  
 
The MANE Group and its employees undertake to comply with the  below key principles relating to the processing of personal data: 
lawfulness, transparency, storage limitation, accuracy, security and confidentiality. They further undertake to be able to demonstrate at all times their compliance with these principles as follows:  
 
 Personal data may only be processed on the basis of a legitimate interest, if explicitly allowed by law or if the express consent of the data subject is obtained.  
 
 Personal data may only be processed for the purpose for which they were originally collected and on which the legitimate interest, legal justification or consent of the data subject are based.  
 
Examples where the principles underpinning the processing of personal data are applied:  
 
 The consent of individuals for the collection of behavioural data (such as cookies) must be positively and explicitly granted,  
and proof thereof should be retained.  
 
 Personal data must be accurately recorded and, if necessary, updated.  
 
 Only employees whose area of activity involves the use of personal data may have access to such data; access must be 
restricted according to the nature and scope of the area of activity in question.  
 
 Data no longer serving the purpose for which it was  originally collected and stored must, if applicable, be erased in 
compliance with applicable law.  
 
 Personal data may not be sold, shared or rented without the explicit consent of the data subjects.  
 
4.2 Categories of prohibited sensitive personal data processing, collection and/or retention :  
 
The processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, tr ade union 
membership or the health and sexuality of the data subject is inherently unlawful and thus prohibited, unless the processing is rendered lawful by specific authorisation of the competent authorities or a legal necessity.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
1/2  
       
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3 Information to data subjects  
 
The MANE Group undertakes, where one of the Group's companies is responsible for the processing of personal data, to provide all 
residents of the European Union ("EU Residents") whose data is  being processed with comprehensive and detailed information on the 
purposes for which t he personal data concerning such EU Residents is  being collected and proc essed.  
 
5. Conditions on the transfer of personal data outside the European Union  
 
In addition to the prerequisites for processing personal data as set out in paragraph 4, transfers of personal data outside t he European 
Union must meet the following requirements:  
 
 Intra-group transfers: if a MANE Group company transmits personal data to another MANE Group company outside the 
European Union, said transferring MANE Group company must prove either that the data subject has expressly consented 
to the transfer of his/her personal data or that the transfer is necessary for the per formance of a contract between the 
transferring MANE Group company and the data subject.  
 
 Transfers to a third party: if a MANE Group company transmits personal data to a non- EU company external to the MANE 
Group, the MANE Group company must prove either that the data subject has expressly consented to the transfer of his/her personal data or that the transfer is necessary for the performance of a contract between it and the data subject. Any  such 
transfer to the external company must also be subject to appropriate safeguards and technical and organisational measures 
to ensure the protection of personal data.  
 
6. Dissemination and application of the Code of Conduct  
 
The MANE Group and its employe es undertake to comply with this Code of Conduct with effect from 25 May 2018.  
 Each employee of the MANE Group undertakes to provide information on an ongoing basis to the competent persons identified in 
paragraph 7 below regarding personal data protection issues with which they may have to deal in the performance of their duties.  
 
7. DPO and DP Coordinators  
 
The MANE Group undertakes to appoint one of its employees as a Data Protection Officer (DPO), contactable via the e- mail address 
dpo@mane.com, in additi on to a coordinator, where warranted within each local branch or department, tasked with centrally 
administering all issues relating to personal data protection for and on behalf of the branch or department concerned (DP 
Coordinators).  
 The DPO will maintain a record of the MANE Group's personal data processing activities as well as a record of processing incidents in 
accordance with the requirements of the GDPR.  
 
The DP Coordinators are required to assist the DPO and provide him/her with all relevant and necessary information to ensure within the scope of their responsibilities that personal data are protected.  
 
8. Protection for individual rights in respect of personal data  
 
The MANE Group undertakes to ensure in the course of its business that the following rights in relation to the processing of personal 
data are effective as to the relevant data subject:   
 
 Right to data access, rectification and deletion, right to data erasure (right to be digitally forgotten);  
 
 Right to transmit data to a third party (right to data portability) for personal data processed on a lawful basis or for the 
performance of a contract.  
 
The MANE Group shall endeavour to expedite, through its DPO and DP Coor dinators,  in complian ce with the applicable law,  this 
Code of Conduct and w ith all other applicable procedures within the MANE Group, all requests made to it by each of its employees, 
customers, suppliers, subcontractors, service providers, partners or other cont ractors in the exercise of such data subject's  rights 
concerning the processing of their personal data (such as the right to rectification and the right to deletion), and to provide proof 
thereof.  
 
9. Data breach notification  
 
All employees of the MANE Group, via the DP Coordinators, and all customers, suppliers, subcontractors, service providers, partners or other contractors of the MANE Group who become aware of a breach of the obligations arising under  this Code of Conduct (such 
as destruction, loss, disclosure, unauthorised access, theft of personal data), must notify the DPO within 24 hours via e- mail to 
dpo@mane.com.  
The DPO shall take the necessary measures to inform the competent authority within 72 hours and the data subject, if appropri ate, of 
any incident and will simultaneously take the necessary steps to resolve the incident and/or personal data breach.  
 
  
2/2 ENFORCEABILITY OF 
PATENTS AND PATENT 
APPLICATIONS
2020 JUN 16th- James Carey
CONFIDENTIAL June 2020
2Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16OPENING QUESTIONS
All patent rights derive themselves from the national laws where the application for patent was filed.1. May patent rights of a granted patent be asserted against an alleged 
infringer?
2. May patent rights of a published patent application be asserted against an 
alleged infringer?YES, unless invalidated or expired!
Maybe, it depends ...3Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 1601
Granted Patent RightsCONTENT
Infringement and Remedies02
"Provisional" Patent Rights03
04
FTO Studies - Defining Risks05
FTO Case Study
06
Closing Remarks - Questions4Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16GRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
5Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16GRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
Claims for granted patents are "set", whereas claims in published applications maybe amended.Simplified Patenting Process
File Patent 
ApplicationApplication 
publishesFirst Office Action 
Notice of AllowanceGranted 
Patent
Granted 
PatentClaims "identical" to 
published application 
claims
Claims rejected
Arguments/amendments 
overcome rejections
Application 
abandonedClaims rejected
Applicant cannot 
overcome rejectionsClaims "narrower" than 
published application 
claims
If not revived, no 
chance for patent 
rights to exist18 mo6Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16GRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
Patent rights depend on the national laws, where the application for patent was filed.Important facts relating to " patent rights ":
1) Scope of patent right is defined by the claims.
2) Patent rights are Territorial/Geographical.
3) Patent rights protect against direct and indirect infringement.
4) Granted Patents are presumed valid (rebuttable).
5) Granted patent  right to practice.
6) Granted patents typically last only 20 years from the earliest filing date, 
a few countries provide patent term extension for governmental delays.7Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16GRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
Infringement is an unauthorized activity of someone else's exclusive right.  IP rights are infringed when a work protected by IP laws is used, copied, or 
otherwise exploited without having the proper permission from the owner of those 
rights.
In the context of patent rights, the patent owner or licensee has the exclusive right 
for: 
making or using
selling
offering for sale
importing
... the claimed invention. Exclusive Rights of the Intellectual Property Holder8Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16GRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
Infringement of a patent rights is governed by national laws.EPC Article 64 - Rights Conferred by a European Patent
(1)  A European patent shall confer on its proprietor from the date on which the mention 
of its grant is published in the European Patent Bulletin, in each Contracting State in 
respect of which it is granted, the same rights as would be conferred by a 
national patent granted in that State .
(2)  If the subject-matter of the European patent is a process, the protection conferred by 
the patent shall extend to the products directly obtained by such process .
(3)  Any infringement of a European patent shall be dealt with by national law .9Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16GRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
Germany, France, and UK are the leaders for where EP patents are typically validated.
https://www.reddie.co.uk/2014/01/13/an-overview-of-ep-
validation-by-country-and-technological-sector/10Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16Heading 1 Heading 1 Heading 1 Exclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*Essential part or knowledgeExclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*Inducing or assistingGRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
FRANCE  GERMANY UK
03Exclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*Inducing
11Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16Heading 1 Heading 1 Heading 1 Exclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*Essential part or knowledgeExclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*Inducing or assistingGRANTED PATENT RIGHTS
FRANCE  GERMANY UK
03Exclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*Inducing
USA JAPAN CHINA
Exclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*InducingExclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*InducingExclusive rights to making, using, 
selling, importing the claimed invention; 
also protects against importing products 
made abroad by patented methods
Direct Infringement
*Literal and 
*Doctrine of Equivalents
Indirect Infringement
*Contributory
*Inducing12Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16INFRINGEMENT AND REMEDIES
13Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16Heading 1 Heading 1 Heading 1 *Preliminary Injunction 
*ex parte - very rare
*inter partes
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*Possible criminal sanctions
*Person 3 yrs and 300k Euro
*Company 1.5M Euro, and dissolution 
of the company*Preliminary Injunction 
*For exceptional cases
*ex parte - very rare
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*No criminal actionINFRINGEMENT AND REMEDIES
FRANCE  GERMANY UK
*Preliminary Injunction
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*Only criminal action is for contempt 
of court
14Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16Heading 1 Heading 1 Heading 1 *Preliminary Injunction 
*ex parte - very rare
*inter partes
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*Possible criminal sanctions
*Person 3 yrs and 300k Euro
*Company 1.5M Euro, and dissolution 
of the company*Preliminary Injunction 
*For exceptional cases
*ex parte - very rare
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*No criminal actionINFRINGEMENT AND REMEDIES
FRANCE  GERMANY UK
03*Preliminary Injunction
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizuredestruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*Only criminal action is for contempt 
of court
USA JAPAN CHINA
*Preliminary Injunction 
*ex parte - very rare
*inter partes
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*Enhanced damages (3X) for willful 
infringement
*No criminal action*Preliminary Injunction 
*inter partes basis only
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*Possible criminal sanctions
*Person 10 yrs and/or 10M Yen
*Company 300M Yen*Preliminary Injunction 
*inter partes basis only
*Permanent Injunction
*Seizure/destruction of goods
*Grant of financial damages
*No punitive damages
*Possible criminal sanctions
*Only in very serious circumstances15Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16"PROVISIONAL" PATENT RIGHTS
16Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16"PROVISIONAL" PATENT RIGHTS
At least some patent rights provisionally attach to published patent applications.Why does it matter if wecan predict the outcome for a pending published 
patent application?File Patent 
ApplicationPublished
Application Granted 
Patent
Granted 
Patent
Application 
abandoned18 mo17Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16"PROVISIONAL" PATENT RIGHTS
"Provisional" rights in patent applications attach as early as when it is published.EPC Article 67 - Rights conferred by a European patent application after 
publication
A European patent application shall, from the date of its publication, provisionally confer upon the 
applicant the protection provided for [granted patents], in the Contracting States designated in the 
application.
.... each State shall ensure at least that, from the date of publication of a European patent 
application, the applicant can claim compensation reasonable in the circumstances from any person 
who has used the invention in that State in circumstances where that person would be liable under 
national law for infringement of a national patent .
The European patent application shall be deemed neverto have had the effects set out in 
paragraphs 1 and 2 when it has been withdrawn, deemed to be withdrawn or finally refused . 18Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16Heading 1 Heading 1 Heading 1 Article L613-1
The exclusive right of exploitation for a
patentshall take effect as of the filing of
the application .
L615-4
Acts committed after a patent
application publishes or after notification
to any third party of a true copy of such
application until notification of grant
may incur patent infringement liability if
the claims have not been broadened
after the first of those dates .
The Court hearing infringement
proceedings based on a patent
application shall reserve judgment
until the patent has been granted .
Article L615-6
In the case of infringement on the basis
of utility patent application, the plaintiff
shall be required to produce a search
report(Article L612-14).Patent Act, SS33
Use of the patented invention in
Germany before the grant of the patent
doesnotconstitute infringement .
However, the patentee can claim
adequate compensation for the use
between the publication of the
application and the grant if
*such use falls within the scope of the
application,
*the defendant was at fault and
*For European Patent Applications - if
the application was made in German
or aGerman translation of the claims
was published by the GPTO or sent to
the defendant .
Compensation usually corresponds to
the amount of a hypothetical license
fee."PROVISIONAL" PATENT RIGHTS
FRANCE  GERMANY UK
03Patent Act, SS69
An action for infringement can only be
brought after grant of the patent ,
butdamages can be recovered under
Section 69 for infringing acts conducted
after publication of the application, but
before grant , provided:
*those acts infringe the claims both as
published and as granted, and
*the defendant can be shown to have
been aware of the existence of the
patent (or patent application).
Publication of European applications and
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)
applications confers provisional
protection in the same manner, provided
the application is published in English.
19Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16Heading 1 Heading 1 Heading 1 35 USC SS154
A patentshall include the right to 
obtain a reasonable royalty from any 
person who, during the period 
beginning on the date of publication of 
the and ending on the date the patent is 
issued--
* makes, uses, offers for sale, or sells in 
the United States the invention as 
claimed in the published patent 
application or imports such an invention 
into the United States; or
* uses, offers for sale, or sells in the 
United States or imports into the United 
States products made by the process as 
claimed in the published patent 
application; and
*  has actual notice of the published 
patent application.
The invention as claimed in the patent is 
substantially identical to the 
invention as claimed in the published 
patent application.Patent Act, Article 65
Provisional patent protection is available 
based on a published application. 
A notice letter may be sent to potential 
infringers demanding compensation for 
theunauthorized exploitation of a 
claimed invention, as published , which is 
enforceable after issuance of a 
patent. 
In certain situations, an expedited 
publication procedure should be used as 
a means for an early notice letter to 
potential infringers. Such an approach 
can serve to enhance damage awards 
and/or bring potential infringers to the 
negotiating table."PROVISIONAL" PATENT RIGHTS
USA JAPAN CHINA
03Patent Act, Article 13, 39
After the application for an invention
patent is published , the applicant may
require the unit or individual that
exploits the said patent to pay an
appropriate amount of royalties.
The invention patent right shall become
effective as of the date of the granting
announcement.
If an appropriate royalty is not paid for
using an invention during the period
from the publication of the invention
patent application to the grant of the
patent right , the period of limitation for
taking legal action by the patentee for
requesting payment of royalties shall be
two years, commencing from the date
when the patentee knows or should
have known of the use of that patent by
another person.
20Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO STUDIES - DEFINING RISKS
21Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO STUDIES - DEFINING RISKS
In order to minimize unknown risks, we need to search and find the problem patent documents.MANE policy is to respect valid, third party patents and patent applications.
So, how do we as a company evaluate or define our risk for patent infringement liability?  
By becoming intimately familiar with the relevant patent landscape.
Types of patent searches:
*Patent Landscape
*A state-of-the-art search for the relevant technology.
*Typically performed at the genesis of an innovation project.
*Advantageous to spot problem patent documents early on.
*Freedom to Operate
*Targeted/focused search of pending patent documents relating to the intended commercial 
embodiment(s).
*Typically performed near the end of project before commercialization.22Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO STUDIES - DEFINING RISKS
We need detailed and complete information to do a freedom to operate search and analysis.Freedom to Operate Study Request form
http://mosscorp.emea.sesam.mane.com/LegalIP/IP/Patents%20study%20forms/Forms/AllItems.aspx
23Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO STUDIES - DEFINING RISKS
FTO search results allows us to understand our risk for commercialization of a project.MANE policy is to respect valid, third party patents and patent applications.
1. Patent counsel develops search strategy and runs the search to identify patent documents 
relevant to MANE's propose activity.
2.  The claims of the patent documents are analyzed vis-a-vis MANE's proposed activity.  
3.  Status of any relevant patent documents are assessed (abandoned, fees paid, etc.).
4.  A written opinion providing FTO guidance is rendered:
Best Case - Said proposed activity is free to exploit (with/out restrictions).
If enforceable patents or pending patent applications block MANE's proposed activity:
Option 1 - Work with R&D to develop design around strategies, if possible.
Option 2 - Commercialize in alternative countries; and monitor problematic patent documents 
for abandonment, invalidation, expiration, etc.
Option 3 - Assess validity 24Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO STUDIES - MITIGATING RISKS
Invalidity actions require a team to find, analyse, and present the prior art in a convincing manner.MANE policy is to respect valid, third party patents and patent applications.
Option 3 - Assess validity of problematic patent documents.
*Goal - Establish or discover clear lack of novelty for eachclaim of concern.
*Often requires collaboration between R&D, Didier Geraud, and Patent Counsel to find novelty-
destroying prior art.
*Careful analysis of novelty-destroying reference(s) and said patent document must be performed to 
foresee probable/likely amendments that applicant couldmake to reestablish claim novelty.
*Present facts and analysis to Senior VMF Management with potential options for "invalidation."
*Patent application
Where possible, seek permission to submit Third Party Observations (good global citizen).
Propose options for commercializing without disclosing to Patent Application Owner (good business).
*Granted Patent 
*Where possible, anonymously initiate validity challenge (e.g., Substantial New Question of Patentability - US).
*Oppositions?25Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO CASE STUDY
26Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO CASE STUDY
FTO search discovered a problematic published PCT application ... design around not reasonable.Strat Dev proposed a cooling flavor composition:
Ingredient Name CAS No. GRAS No. Wt%
L-Isopulegol 89-79-2 2962 20
L-Monomenthyl glutarate 220621-22-7 4006 28
L-Monomenthyl lactate 61597-98-6 3748 40
L-Monomenthyl succinate 77341-67-4 3810 12
Optional Maltodextrin 9050-36-6 21 CFR 184.1444
FTO search found 1 relevant published patent application of concern:
WO2017079506A1 - NATURAL COOLING FORMULATIONS
Published Claim 1. 
A cooling composition comprising one or more natural compounds selected from the group 
consisting of natural isopulegol , natural menthyl lactate , natural menthyl succinate , natural 
menthol, and combinations thereof.
??? If we cannot design around ... do we "respect" an unexamined published claim?27Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16FTO CASE STUDY
Novelty destroying reference forced applicant to amend claims toward excluding our proposed formulation.US20070148283 - abandoned patent application, discloses Composition A
*Cooling Composition A anticipates broad independent claim of WO2017079506A1
*WO2017079506A1 only discloses an isopulegol content of 25 wt% to 75 wt%.
*MANE's proposed cooling composition only has 20 wt% (MAX) isopulegol.
*Permission granted from MANE management to submit Third Party Observations in EP and US files
*Rejection over Comp A induced adding an amendment reciting isopulegol at 25 wt% to 75 wt%.  
*Thus MANE's composition is outside scope of these amended.   
*Additional applications are  pending in Australia, Canada, China, and Russia ... so we will continue 
to monitor.
*Sales team notified to not provide MANE's Cooling Composition to owner of WO2017079506A1.
28Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16CLOSING REMARKS - QUESTIONS
29Enforceability of patents and patent applications
Confidential | 2020 June 16CLOSING REMARKS - QUESTIONS
Best option (from risk perspective) is to avoid infringement (literally or Doctrine of Equivalents).Key Take-A-Ways
1. MANE respects valid, third party patents and patent applications.
2. Best option for problematic patents and/or patent applications is to avoid infringement.
a. Design around?
b. Commercialize where patent protection is not?
c. Wait ... wait ... wait ...?
3. If options in point 2 are not possible/reasonable/practical ...
a. Invalidity (novely-destroying) Investigation ... but this requires extra effort from 
TEAMS to collaborate, find the "right" prior art, and propose low risk solutions to 
MANE Senior Management.
b. If you can't beat them, buy/license them????FOR MORE
INFORMATION,
CONTACT US
www.mane.comJames.CAREY@mane.com
+1 513 239 2254GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PURCHASE  
 
1. De finitions : 
The following capitalized terms shall have the meaning set out below : 
. GTCP means the following Gen eral Terms and Conditions of Purchase . 
. The Buyer  means V. MANE FILS or any of its subsidiaries . 
.  The Supplier means any company to whom a purchase order  is sent by Buyer.   
. Products  means  the products and/or se rvices to be supplied or performed by the  Supplier as per the 
purchase order  issued by the Buyer .   
.  Information means commercial, finan cial, technical and/or scientific information whatsoever disclosed by 
the Buyer to the  Supplier in connection with a  purchase order and its performance , including but not 
limited to technical specifications, formulae, samples, methods and know -how.  
.  Party(ies) means the collective or individual designation of the Buyer and the Supplier. 
 
2. Application of the GTCP 
The GTCP  will apply to any purchase of Products by the Buyer from the Supplier. In the event of 
inconsistency, the terms and condi tions of the Buyer's  purchase order shall prevail over the GTCP . 
No condition or reservation issued by the Supplier including those mentioned on  its general terms and 
conditions of sale , on the order acknowledgement or on any other document issued by the S upplier shall 
have precedence over the GTCP, unless agreed in writing by the Buyer.  
 
3. Purchase orders  
The provision of any Product  is subject to the prior order in writing from  the Buyer. The Supplier's  acceptance 
of the order shall im ply the Supplier's  agreement to the GTCP and to any specific terms and conditions 
mentioned i n the purchase order. The Supplier shall accept  the purchase order by way of a written 
confirmation within a maximum of 3 (three ) working days  as from its  dispatc h date. Once this time has 
elapse d the purchase order will be deemed accepted by the Supplier . Notwithstanding the foregoing, the 
Buyer reserv es the right to cancel any order for convenience at any time prior to delive ry. Any amendment to  
the purchase order and to the specific terms and c onditions  in the purchase order shall be subject to the 
Buyer's  prior written consent.  
 
4. Changes  
Any order change requested by the Buyer  which causes a n increase or decrease in the order price shall 
result in the issuance by the Supplier of a corrective  quotation  which must be accepted b y the Buyer prior to 
any impl ementation of the requested change.  During the performance of the order, the Supplier shall make 
any Product change or adjustment requested  by the Buyer.   
 
5. Price  
The prices stated in  the pur chase order are deemed to have bee n agreed between the Supplier  and the 
Buyer and are fixed and firm and cannot be modified without the prior written consent of the Buyer. Unless 
otherwise agreed, p rices are "Delivered Duty P aid" - DDP (Incoterms - ICC 20 20) at the named  place  of 
delivery  and include all c osts necessary to the supply of the Products and in particular packaging,  packing,  
transport ation , customs  duties, taxes, insurance and any charge s related to the performance o f the order.    
 
6. Invoicing  and payment  
Invoices  shall be issued upon delivery of the Products and shall be sent by  e-mail or as may be  specified by 
the Buyer at the invoicing address specified in the purchase order . Each invoice  must be ar the order number, 
the deli very note referen ces, the Product identification and the lot/batch  number , and include all the 
compulsory mentions.  
Subject to the acceptance  of the Products by the Buyer, invoices are paid as per the payment terms of the 
purch ase order and  in the absence of such stipulati ons, 60 (sixty) days as from the invoicing date by bank 
transfer in Euros  or in the  relevant  currency established in the purchase order. 
Payment o f an invoice by the Buyer does not imply its accepta nce of the Products nor  shall it restric t any  
rights  the B uyer may have .  
  
7. Delivery Dates  
Time is of the essence. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the  delivery lead times  specified in the order 
are of the essence and are deemed agreed  between th e Parties. They can be amended upon prior written 
accept ance o f the Buyer  only. The Supplier shall notify any delay to the Buyer  as soon as such delay 
becomes foreseea ble, stating the reasons for such  delay and the duration thereof. In the event of any delay in 
delivery, the Buyer reserv es th e right to cancel t he ord er, at the Supplier's fault, without any other formality 
and without prejudice to the right to claim  damages. Any delay in delivery will result in a penalty amounting to 
0,5% of the am ount of th e late Products  (VAT excluded)  per day of delay , up to 10% of the total price of the 
order.  
 
8. Delivery , Packing  and Labelling  
The Products are delivered as per the terms specifi ed in the order and at the location  indicated in the order.  
For P roducts th at are services, any service tim eline, service levels, d eadlin es, or other specified terms or 
conditions shall be included in the relevant order.  
The Supplier  shall comply with the Buyer's delivery instructions and provide the Buyer with the certificate of  
compliance  of the Products  and the delivery note.   
Exce pt oth erwise stated in the purchase order by way of an Incoterm, the Supplier shall deliver the Products 
DDP [Deliver ed Duty Paid] (Incoterms ICC 20 20). 
The transportation  of hazardous good s, and any  associated declaration, must be  made in compliance with the 
applicable regulations  in force.  
The Products must  be packed and secured  in such a manner that they are protected against deterioration  
durin g transit  and storage . The packag ing and lab els shall comply with the legisl ation in force and contain the  
product name, the net weight , the gross weight, the batch/lot number,  the manufacturing date, the shelf life  of 
the Product  and all necessary documentation , technical specifications  and certifi cates including  any 
information required by the purchase order . 
The Buyer is entitled to reject the good s in the event of non -conformity of  packaging, labelling or transport 
documents, without prejudice to any damages that the Buyer may claim. T he Supplier  is liable for any 
damage caused  directly or indirectly by a d efect ing or inappropriate packaging or la belling.  
 
9. Reception and non -conformity of the Products  
The Buyer reserves the right to reject the Products that do not conform to the orde r or to any  technical 
specifications, sampl es or any other applicable doc ument , quality standard , service level  or regulation in 
force, either upon delivery or subsequently to the delivery, after inspection and control of the Products by the 
Buyer.  
The Pro ducts thus rejected by the Buyer shall be collected  by the Supplier, at i ts own risks and expenses, 
within 8 (eight) days from the notification of rejection.  Thereupon , the Buyer is entitled, without incurring any 
liability of any kind, to have the Produ cts removed, by any means at its  own discreti on, at the Supplier' s 
expenses  and risks.  In the absence of technical and/or commercial agreement on the Products rejected by 
the Buyer for non -conformity due to contradictory results of analysis, the Buyer's meth ods of anal ysis shall 
prevail over those of  the Supplier.  
Should the Buye r reject the non -conforming Products  as mentioned above , the payment of such  non-
conforming Products is not due and the Bu yer can, at its  own discretion and with out prejudice to any o ther 
right or action the Bu yer may have, de mand that the Supplier  replace  the Products or make the Products 
conform  as well as  make any action  or adjustment necessary for the full completion of the order. The Supplier 
shall bear all costs resulting from the non -confo rmity of the Products (reprocess ing, destruction ...)  
The inspe cted P roducts, even  if declared conform  or, in the case of services, even if they went through an 
acceptance procedure without any reservations, remain warranted  in accordance with art icle 13. Th e 
acceptance of the Products by the Buyer  shall not relieve the Supplier from its  liability  in this respect.  
 
10. Transfer of title and risks  
Notwithstanding any pr ovision to the contrary contain ed in the documents issued by the Supplier, title  to the 
Products  shall pass to the Buyer up on due delivery of the Produc ts. Th e risks of loss or damage to the 
Products shall pass to the Buyer upon delivery of the Products at the Buyer's p remises and after the 
unloading , notwithstanding any arrangement b etwe en the parties in respect of transport  conditions and 
payment.     
 
11. Independent Contractor  
The Supplier shall provide all necessary material means and human resources for the supply of the Products. 
The Supplier shall be solely res ponsible fo r its personnel and for the mate rial means used for the 
perfo rmance of the order. Th e Supplier  shall ensure custody and care for the goods  entrusted by the Buyer  for the execution of the order.   In the event of on-site order performance o r delivery , the Supplier undertakes 
to comp ly with the Buyer 's rules  as well as with any security and safety instruction s transmitted  by the Buyer.   
 
12. Quality  
The Supplier  undertakes that the Products comply with the re quirements of the q uality standa rds invoked  by 
the Buyer and with  the Buyer's Quality System.  The Supplier undertakes to ensure the tr aceability of the 
Products and to comply with the traceability requirements provided  by the Buyer.   
 
13. Warranty  
Without prejudice  to the appl ication of  the legal warranty, the Supplier  contractually w arrants that the 
Products : 
- comply with the order, the technical specifications and any other applicable documents or samples 
provided by the Buyer or agreed between the Parties  
- comply with the stat e of the ar t and the state of technology . 
- are free from any  apparent or latent defect  or from any defect in desig n, material, workmanship or 
operation  
- are fit for the purpose  intended by the Buyer  and suitable for  the Buyer's needs and requirements.    
This warranty runs for a duration of 12 (twelv e) months as from the recepti on of the Products by the Buyer  or 
for th e duration offered by the Supplier if such a duration is longer than  12 (twelve) months.  
The contractual warranty consists of, at the Buy er's discre tion, either replace or repair t he Products at the 
Supplier's  expense or re imburse the Products to the Buye r. In both cases , the Supplier shall bear al l costs 
resulting from the Products' defect, without prejudice to any right or action that the  Buyer may have.  
Furthermore, the Supplier  warrants to the Buyer for an un limited period of time  that the Products are  supplied 
in strict compliance with the REACH regulation ndeg 1907/2006  (if applicable ) and more generally with any an d 
all applicable law, standard o r regulation.  
 
14. Liability a nd Insurance  
The Supplier shall be liable for any damages of any kind caused t o the Buyer, the Buyer's personnel and to 
any third party as well as to th eir properties, arising out of the perform ance of the order and resulting from any  
act of the Supplier , its personnel, its subcontractors or  its material or caused directly or indire ctly by the 
Products. The Supplier shall indemnify and hold the Buyer harm less against any demand, action  or claim  in 
respect thereof.  The Supplie r must take out and maintain, with underwriters  commonly  known as solvent, 
insurance policies covering its ci vil liability ( CGL, Products Liab ility, and Recall ) against  any direct , indirect, 
material, intangible and body  damages,  for a sufficient  amoun t of coverage.  
The Supplier sh all be able to provide evidence thereof at any time upon the Buyer's request.  
 
15. Termination    
If the Supplier fai ls to perform any of its obligations under the order or this GTCP , the Buy er is automatically  
entitled to terminate the order at the Sup plier's fault , after giving  formal notice  and provided  such  non 
performance was not rem edied  within 8 (eight) days.  Termination of the order shall be without  prejudice to 
the Buyer 's right  to claim damages for any damage res ulting  from the Supplier's bre ach. The Buyer reserves 
the right to substitute itself for the Supplier or to substitute  a third party for  the Suppl ier in  the performance of 
whole or part of the order not fulfilled in time , at the Supplier's expense.  
 
16. Intellectual Property  
The Produ cts a nd any us e thereof shall  not infringe third parties' intellectual property rights, and in particular 
patents , trademarks, copyright, design, know -how, and  the Supplier shall defend, indemni fy and hold 
harmless the Buyer against any and all third-party  demand, action , claim , damages, expenses and costs  in 
respect thereof . Any improvement or process invention resulti ng from any information disclosed by the Bu yer 
and/or from the Buyer's order s hall not be patented by the Supp lier.    
The Supplier grants t o the Buyer all the intellectual property rights necessary to use the ordered Products o r 
to commercially utilize  the results arising  from the Products. The  Supplier  hereby trans fers the intellectual 
property rights of any Product specif ically developed  for Buyer to the Buyer . 
  
17. Confidentiality  
The order and the Informa tion shall be consi dered strictly confidenti al by the Supplier. The Supplier 
undertakes to hold the order and the Information in confidence and not to disclose t he same to third parties 
nor t o use the same for any purpose other than the performance of the order.  The Supplier  shall limit the 
disclosu re of the Information to its own em ployees on a "need to know" basis.  
This confidentiality obligation shall remain ap plicable for an indefinite  time period . 
 
18. Force Majeure  
Neither P arty shall be held liable towards the  other Party for non -performance or  delayed performance of  its 
obligations insofar as it is  due to  the occ urrence of unforeseen circumst ances, and  external  causes beyond its 
control , through no fault o f its own . Should the  Supplier's compliance with th e GTCP  be aff ected by such a  
cause, the Supplier shall promptly notify the Buyer of such impossibility of perf ormance. If such non -
performan ce continues in effect for more than a month,  the Buyer is entit led to terminate the related orders. 
However , in no event shall t he Supplier's performance be excused hereunder if reasonable alternate 
methods, subcontractors o r sources of Product are avail able to the Supplier.  
19. Hardship  
Only cases of exceptional cha nge of economic circumstances  unforeseeable  at the time  the orde r was 
conclud ed, where such change affects substantially the balance of the order, and makes su ch order's 
execution extremely  harmful for the Party that had not accepted to bear such risks o f harm, such change shall 
be deemed an "Unpr edictable Event". The Party claimin g the Unpredictable Event shall promptly notify the 
other Party in writing providi ng evidence that reasonably ev inces the reality of such Unpredictable Event. 
Provided the Unpre dictable Event is duly acknowledged by the o ther Party, the Partie s undertake t o 
renegotiate the affected order in good faith and formalize the result of such re negotiation in writing within 15 
days from the receipt of the notification of such Unpredictabl e Event, and such order shall be automatical ly 
terminated should t he Parties fa il to successfully renegotiate it.   
 
20. Corresponde nce 
Any corresponde nce relati ng to the order shall be sent to the  Buyer's  Purchasing Department and marked for 
the attention  of the contact person designated in the  purchase  order.  
 
21. Assignment  and subcontracting   
The Supplier shall not assign, transfer or subcontract the order in  whole or in part and t he obli gations that 
results there from without the prior written consent of the Buyer.  In the event of an authorized  subcontracting, 
the S upplier remai ns solely liable to the Buyer for the performance of the contract.  
 
22. Miscellan eous  
Failure by the Buyer to exercise any of its rights shall not be deemed to be a waiver of  any such right in the 
future. If any of th e provisions contained in  these GTC P shall be illegal or unenforceable for any cause or 
reason whatsoever, such illeg ality or unenforceability shall  not affect the other provisions hereof.  
 
23. Personal data  
In accordance with Law No. 78 -17 of January 6, 1978 as amended and Gener al Data Protection Regulation 
2016/679 of April 27, 2016, personal da ta concerning the Supplier is subject to computer processing by the 
Buyer, acting as data controller, in order to carry out processes related to the management of trade relations 
in the c ontext of the purchase of Products for the period strictly necessary for their completion. For more 
information and exercise of the rights of the Supplier, the data protection officer of the Buyer may be 
contacted at the e -mail address: dpo@mane.com.  
 
23. Languages  
In the e vent of any conflict between the English version of the GTCP  and any translatio n into another 
language, the English version shall control.  
 
24. Applicable Law an d jurisdiction  
The GTCP  and any  order placed hereunder are governed by the do mestic law of France and no others . Any 
dispute ar ising out of or in connection with the execution and/or interpretation of the GTCP  or the order, which  
cannot be re solved amicably, shall be subject to the ju risdiction of the Courts of Nice (France ). 
 
Dece mber 17, 202 1  
 General  Terms and  Conditions of Sales  
 
March  24, 2020 
 
 
 
 
1. Definitions 
The following capitalized terms  shall have the meaning set out below: 
- GTCS  means the following General Terms  
and Conditions of Sale. 
- The Seller means the subsidiaries  of V. MANE F ILS in India .  
- The Buyer means any individual or legal 
entity order ing or purchasing Products from the Seller. 
- Prod ucts means the set of products and/or 
services proposed  or supplied by the Seller to the Buyer. 
- Informat ion means commerc ial, financial, technical and/or scientific informat ion whatsoever  
disclosed  by the Seller to the Buyer within the frame work of the sale of the 
Products, including but not limited to technical spec ifications, formulae, samples, methods  and 
know-how. 
- Party( ies): means the collective or individual designation of the Buyer and the Seller. 
2. Applicability of the GTCS  
The GTCS  apply to all sales of Prod ucts by the Seller and set forth the terms  and 
conditions under which the Seller accepts  to supp ly the Products to the Buyer. 
The Buyer's  general terms  and conditions of purchase are express ly rejected . No spec ific 
condition issued by the Buyer which may appear  on the purchase  order  or on any document 
communicated by the Buyer, shall prevail over t he GTCS, u nless accepted  in writing by the 
Seller. Unless expressly stated otherwise in Seller's offer , the Seller's offer is  valid for 30 
(thirty) days  from date of issue . 
3. Orders  
Any order  placed  by the Buyer with the Seller implies the acceptance of these GTCS 
without any reservat ions. The orders  are only binding on the Seller subject to prior 
acceptance  in writing from the Seller. 
No order  modification shall be made  without the prior written consent of the Seller. Prices 
and delivery dates  shall be revised accord ingly. 
Orders  are not subject to cancellation. Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Seller, the 
minimum order  is 1000 US Dollars  (taxes excluded) or the equivalent amount in the 
relevant currency if the price is not quoted in US Dollars . 
4. Delivery and transfer of risks 
Delivery dates  specified by the Seller on the order  confirmation are mere  guidance without any 
guarantee. Delivery after delivery the date specified shall not be cause for  the Buyer to  cancel 
the order,  reject the Products or claim damages.  
Except otherwise stated on the order confirmation as per the Incoterm  or approved in writing 
by the Seller, the Prod ucts are delivered  FCA (Incoterms  ICC 2020), and notwithstanding any 
terms of delivery or paym ent of the transportat ion costs  agreed betwe en the Parties, the 
risks of loss or  damag ing shall pass  to the Buyer upon  collection of the Products by the first 
carrier at the Seller's premises, plants or warehouses. 
5. Recept ion of the Products and Claims 
Upon receipt of the Products,  the Buyer shall examine carefully the conformity of the 
Products. Rem arks concerning shortages, excess,  alteration or appar ently damaged  
Products must be immed iately clearly noted  on the transport  documents. 
All claims relating to the Products must  be notified in writing to the Seller within 5 (five) days  
from delivery.  In the event  Buyer fails to notify Seller of its claim within the above  prescribed time, 
the Products shall be deemed  to have been  irrevocab ly accepted  by the Buyer and no 
subsequent claim for non-conformity of the Products or for obvious defects shall be valid. 
For any defect not reasonably noticeable by the Buyer upon receipt, despite a careful inspection, 
the Buyer shall  give notice to the Seller within 5 (five) days following the discovery of the defect, 
and in any event no la ter than 3 (three) months after delivery of the Products.  
The Products may not be returned to  the Seller without its prior written approva l. 
The Buyer must  justify the claim and grant the Seller a reaso nable opportu nity to inspect  the 
Products (directly at the Buyer's  prem ises or by me ans of samples). The Buyer shall 
communicate to the Seller any element or informat ion necessary  to verify the claim. 
No claim will be valid once the Products have be en transferre d, reso ld to a third party or have 
undergone any treatment or processing. 
6. Prices 
All prices are net and exclusive of VAT or any other tax, customs  duties, delivery and 
insurance costs. Unless otherwise agreed, prices are quoted in US Dollars  FCA (Incoterms  
ICC 2020). Regard ing stagge red deliveries related to a single order  or prices offers  including a 
limited duration of validity, the Seller reserves  the right to revise prices previously agreed  upon, 
at any time, in case  of a substantial rise in the price of labour or raw mater ials. 
7. Paym ent 
The invoices are payab le without discount to the Seller's invoicing address,  by bank transfer 
in US Dollars for exports from India and in Indian Rupees for sales within India  and within 
30 (thirty) days  from invoice date,  unless otherw ise agreed  in writing by the Seller or stated  on 
the invoice. Buyer shall have no right of set -off. 
Should the Buyer fail to settle one or several  invoices, the Seller reserves  the right to suspend 
further deliveries or to require security to be given. 
In in the event of delay in paym ent, overdue amounts shall bear interest  at the rate 
applied by the European Central Bank  (or Reserve Bank of India, as the case may be)  to its 
most  recent main refinancing operation plus 10 percentage  points, without prior notice of default 
being required, in addition to an indemnity for debt 
collection expenses  amounting to a lump sum of 40 euros. 
8. Retention of title 
THE PRO DUCTS REMAIN THE ENTIRE PROPERTY  OF THE SELLER UNTIL FULL 
PAYME NT OF THE PUR CHASE PRICE  AND ALL ANCILLARY CHARGES . In the event  of 
overdue paym ent, the Seller is entitled to recover  possess ion of the Products at the Buyer's 
expense at any time until complete payme nt, without prejudice to claim damages.  
9. Warranty  
The Seller warra nts that the Products comply with the technical spec ifications provided by the 
Seller. 
ALL WARRANTIES OTHER  THAN THOSE SET FORTH IN THE GTCS, WHETHER  
EXPRESS  OR IMPL IED, INCLUDING  IMPLIED  WARRANTIES OF MERC HANTABILITY   
AND   FITNESS   FOR   A   PARTICU LAR   PUR POSE,  ARE EXPRESSE LY EXCLUDED.  
The warranty shall not apply to the extent that: - the claim has not been submitted in accordance  with clause  5 above 
- the claim is not allowed  due to the transfer, resale, treatm ent or process ing of the 
Products by the Buyer or a third party.  
- the Buyer has breached its duty of care and made  an improper  use of the Products or 
failed to preserve  or store  the Products according to the Seller's instruct ions. 
In case  of non-conformity or proven defect acknowledged  by the Seller, the latter may,  at its 
sole discret ion, replace the Products at  its own expense or reimburse the defective Products. 
If Seller completes any of the foregoing remedies , it shall be the sole compensation for the 
defect iveness of the Products and be exclusive of any other comp ensation or 
damages  in respect thereof. 
10. Purpos e and preservat ion of the Products 
The Products are exclusively intended to be integrated  into the Buyer's final products. The 
Buyer is not allowed  to resell  the Prod ucts "as is" or to repackage  the Products in order  to 
distribute the same  to third parties without the prior written approval  of the Seller. 
It is the Buyer's  responsibility to ensure that the said final products comp ly with all 
applicable laws and regulations of the country in which the same  are marketed.  
The Seller shall not be held liable for the Product's suitability to the use intended by the 
Buyer, notwithstanding any informat ion given by the Seller. 
The Buyer undertakes  to handle, preserve  and store  Products in comp liance with the 
Seller's recomm endations and in a proper manner in consideration of the nature of the 
Products. 
11. Liability 
In no event shall the Seller be held liable for any special, indirect, incidental, punitive or 
consequential damages  of any kind, including, without limitation, loss of use, loss of 
profits or revenues or other economic loss. THE SELLER'S  AGGRE GATE LIABILITY, IN 
RESPE CT OF THE SALE OF THE PRODU CTS TO THE BUYER, SHALL NOT  
EXCEED THE AMOUNT OF THE ORD ER OF THE PRODUCTS HAVING GIVEN  RISE  TO 
THE CLAIM. 
12. Intellectual Property  
All intellectual property  rights related to the Products, including but not limited to patents, 
know-how,  trademar ks, copyr ights and any intellectual property  right whether registered  or 
not, are and shall remain the exclusive property  of the Seller. 
No intellectual property  right is either assigned or granted to the Buyer as a result of the sale 
of the Products. The Se ller grants the Buyer a right to use the Products for the sole purpose 
of manufac turing and market ing the Buyer's  products.  
The Buyer may not apply for any intellectual property  title or seek  protect ion in respect of  the 
Informat ion disclosed  by the Seller or  the inventions, know-how or techno logies deve loped  
by the Seller and related to Products.  
13. Confidentiality 
The Information shall be held in strict confidence by the Buyer. The Buyer agrees  to hold 
the Information in confidence and not to disclose the same  to third parties nor to use the 
same for any purpose  other than express ly authorized by the Seller. 
This confidentiality obligation shall not expire by the passage of time.  
The Buyer shall not perform  directly, or indirectly by way of a third party,  any analysis of the 
Products samp les, in order  to determine their chemical structure  or compo sition and/or 
manufacturing process. Samp les are supplied by the Seller for the exclusive purpose of 
evaluation and shall not be subject to commerc ial use. 
14. Personal data  
In accordance with Law No. 78 -17 of January 6, 1978 as amended and General Data 
Protection Regulation 2016/679 of April 27, 2016, personal data concerning the Buyer is 
subject  to computer processing by the S eller, acting as data controller, in order to carry out 
processes related to the management of trade relations in the context of the supply of 
Products for the period strictly necessary for their completion. For more informa tion and 
exercise of the rights of the Buyer, the data protection officer of the Seller may be contacted 
at the e -mail address: dpo@mane.com . 
15. Force  Majeure 
The Seller shall not be held liable for the non-perform ance of any of its obligations when 
directly or indirectly due to an event of force majeure including but not limited to strike, lock-
out, equipment breakd own, epidemic, defect  of raw mater ials or delays caused by a 
subcontractor  or a supplier, inability to pass the cost of a substantial rise in the price of 
labour or raw materials. The event of force  majeure suspends the perform ance of the 
Seller's obligations for the duration of the event. In case of an event of force  majeure 
exceed ing 3 (three ) months, each  Party  shall be entitled to terminate the unperformed  portion  
of the order. 
16. Assignment or Transfer 
The Buyer shall neither transfer nor assign all or part of its rights and obligations 
hereunder  without the prior written consent of the Seller. 
17. Miscellaneous 
Failure by the Seller to exercise any of its rights shall not be deem ed to be a waiver of any 
such right in the future. 
If any of the provisions contained in these  GTCS  shall be illegal or unenforceab le for any 
cause or reason whatsoever,  such illegality or unenforceab ility shall not affect  the other 
provisions hereof. 
18. Languages  
In the event of any conflict between  the English version of the GTCS  and any translation into 
another language, the English version shall control. 
19. Applicable Law and Jurisdiction 
For sa les outside India:  The GTCS  and all sales hereunder are governed  by French laws. 
Any dispute arising out of or in connect ion with the execution and/or interpre tation of the 
GTCS  shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the COU RTS OF NICE  (FRANCE).  
For sales within India:  The GTCS  and all sales hereunder are governed  by Indian laws.  Any 
dispute arising out of or in connect ion with the execution and/or interpre tation of the GTCS  
shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the COU RTS OF MUMBAI (INDIA) .   
 General  Terms and  Conditions of Sale  for Goods  
 
March  24, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Definitions  
The following capitalized terms shall have the meaning set out below:  
GTCS means the following General Terms and Conditions of Sale.  
The Seller means MANE USA INC. or an y of its subsidiaries.  
The Buyer means any individual or legal entity ordering or purchasing Products 
from the Seller.  
Products means the materials proposed or supplied by the Seller to the Buyer.  
Information means commercial, financial, technical and/or scientific information 
whatsoever disclosed by the Seller to the Buyer within the framework of the 
sale of the Products, including but not limited to technical specifications, 
formulae, samples, methods and know -how.  
Party means the collective or individua l designation of the Buyer and the 
Seller.  
Unless clearly inappropriate, singular terms refer also to the plural number and 
vice versa.  
2. Applicability of the GTCS  
These GTCS apply to all sales of Products by the Seller and set forth the terms 
and conditi ons under which the Seller accepts to supply the Products to the 
Buyer.   
Any additional or different terms and conditions of purchase are expressly 
rejected. No specific term issued by the Buyer which may appear on the 
purchase order or on any document co mmunicated by the Buyer, shall alter or 
prevail over these GTCS unless agreed in writing by the Seller.  
Unless stated otherwise in the offer, price and delivery quotations are valid for 
30 days from issue and subject to confirmation upon receipt of order.  
3. Orders  
Any order placed by the Buyer with the Seller implies the acceptance of the 
GTCS without any reservations. The orders are only binding on the Seller upon 
issuance of Seller's order confirmation  
No order modification or cancellation will be per mitted except with the prior 
written consent of the Seller, subject to cost and schedule impact.  
Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Seller, the minimum order is US$500 
(taxes excluded).  
4. Delivery and Risk of Loss  
Delivery dates are specified by th e Seller on the order confirmation for 
estimates and not a guarantee. Delivery after the date shown shall not allow 
the Buyer to cancel the order, reject the Products or claim damages.  
Except otherwise stated on the order confirmation or approved in writi ng by the 
Seller, shipping term is FCA Seller's factory (Incoterms 2020).  
5. Inspection Period  
Upon receipt of the Products, the Buyer shall examine the Products. Notes 
about shortages, excess, alteration or apparently damaged Products must be 
noted on the  bill of lading and reported to the carrier.  
Buyer must notify seller of any rejection of the Products five (5) days of 
delivery. Failure to reject the goods within this time shall be deemed an 
acceptance.For any defect not reasonably discoverable by the Buyer upon 
receipt, the Buyer shall, give notice to the Seller within five (5) days following 
the discovery of the defect, and no later than ninety (90) days after delivery of 
the Products.  
The Products may not be returned to the Seller without its prior written 
approval.  
Any claims are subject to verification by Seller via sampling or at Buyer's 
premises, at Seller's sole election.  No claims wil be accepted after the 
Products are resold, incorporated, or altered by Buyer.  
6. Prices  
All prices are net and  exclusive of any applicable taxes, customs duties, 
delivery and insurance costs. Unless otherwise agreed, prices are quoted in 
US Dollars FCA Seller's factory (Incoterms 2020). Quoted prices are subject to 
change due to increases in raw materials.  
7. Paym ent 
The invoices are payable NET 30 by check, ACH, or wire transfer, unless 
otherwise agreed in writing by the Seller or stated on the invoice.Amounts 
outstanding beyond the stated due date shall bear interest at the rate of one 
percent (1%) per month, com pounding monthly. Buyer shall be responsible for 
all reasonable costs incurred in collecting past due invoices, including 
attorney's fees.  
Buyer grants Seller a security interest in any Products delivered until payment 
is made in full.  
8. Retention of titl e 
Title shall transfer upon payment in full of associated invoices.  
9. Warranty  
The Seller warrants that the Products comply with the technical specifications 
provided by the Seller.  
ALL WARRANTIES OTHER THAN THOSE SET FORTH IN THESE GTCS, 
WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING IMPLIED WARRANTIES 
OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, 
ARE EXPRESSELY EXCLUDED.  
 The warranty shall not apply to the extent that:  
- the claim has not been submitted in accordance with section 5, above  
- the claim has been waived due to the resale, incorporation, or alteration of 
the Products by the Buyer or a third party.  
- the Buyer has made an improper use of the Products or failed to preserve or 
store the Products according to the Seller's instructions.  
In the event of non -conformance with the agreed -to specifications, Seller may, 
at its sole discretion, replace the Products at its own expense or reimburse the 
defective Products  as the Buyer's sole and complete remedy for non -
conforming Products.  
10. Purpose an d Preservation of the Products.  
The Products are to be incorporated into Buyer's final products.  
The Buyer must not resell or repackage the Products in order to distribute the 
same to third parties without incorporation without Seller's consent.  
It is the  Buyer's responsibility to ensure that its own final products incorporating 
Products incorporation comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the 
country in which the same are marketed.  
11. Liability  
In no event shall the Seller be liable for any s pecial, indirect, incidental, 
punitive or consequential damages of any kind, including, without limitation, 
loss of use, loss of profits or revenues or other economic loss. THE SELLER'S 
AGGREGATE LIABILITY, IN RESPECT OF THE SALE OF THE PRODUCTS 
TO THE BUY ER, SHALL NOT EXCEED THE PURCHASE PRICE OF THE 
PRODUCTS AT ISSUE.     
12. Intellectual Property  
All intellectual property rights related to the Products, including but not limited 
to patents, know -how, trademarks, copyrights and any intellectual property 
right whether registered or not, are and shall remain the exclusive property of 
the Seller.  
No intellectual property right is either assigned or granted to the Buyer as a 
result of the sale of the Products. The Seller grants the Buyer a right to use the 
Prod ucts for the sole purpose of manufacturing and marketing the Buyer's 
products.  
The Buyer will not apply for any intellectual property title or seek protection in 
respect of the Information disclosed by the Seller or the inventions, know -how 
or technologie s developed by the Seller and related to Products.  
13. Confidentiality  
The Information is confidential and will not be disclosed or used by the 
Buyerfor any purpose other than expressly authorized by the Seller.  
This confidentiality obligation shall remain  applicable indefinitely.  
The Buyer shall not perform directly, or indirectly by way of a third party, any 
analysis of the Products for purposes of reverse engineering, copying, or 
substitution.  
14. Force Majeure  
The Parties shall not be held liable for th e non -performance of any of its 
obligations when directly or indirectly due to an event of force majeure 
including but not limited to strike, lock -out, equipment breakdown, epidemic, 
defect of raw materials or delays caused by a subcontractor or a supplier , 
inability to pass the cost of a substantial rise in the price of labour or raw 
materials, or an act of God.  
The event of force majeure suspends the performance of the affected Party's 
obligations for the duration of the event. In case of an event of for ce majeure 
exceeding three (3) month, each Party shall be entitled to terminate the 
unperformed part of the order.  
15. Assignment or Transfer  
The Buyer shall neither transfer nor assign all or part of its rights and 
obligations hereunder without the prior  written consent of the Seller.  
16. Miscellaneous  
Failure by the Seller to exercise any of its rights shall not be deemed to be a 
waiver of any such right in the future.  
If any of the provisions contained in these GTCS shall be illegal or 
unenforceable for  any cause or reason whatsoever, such illegality or 
unenforceability shall not affect the other provisions hereof.  
17. Languages  
In the event of any conflict between the English version of the GTCS and any 
translation into another language, the English ve rsion shall control.  
18. Applicable Law and Jurisdiction  
The GTCS and all sales hereunder are governed by law of the State of Ohio , 
without regard to its conflict of laws rules. Any dispute arising out of or in 
connection with the execution and/or interpre tation of the GTCS shall be 
subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the state and federal courts of Warren 
County, Ohio . 
  
 General  Terms and  Conditions of Sales  
 
March  24, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Definitions 
The following capitalized terms  shall have the meaning set out below: 
- GTCS  means the following General Terms  and Conditions of Sale. 
- The Seller means V. MANE  FILS  or any of its subsidiaries except ( i )  all MANE  
American subsidiaries and (ii) all MANE Indian subsidiaries.  
- The Buyer means any individual or legal entity order ing or purchasing Products from 
the Seller. 
Prod ucts means the set of products and/or services proposed  or supplied by the Seller 
to the Buyer. 
- Informat ion means commerc ial, financial, technical and/or scientific informat ion 
whatsoever  disclosed  by the Seller to the Buyer within the frame work of the sale of the 
Products, including but not limited to technical specifications, formulae, samples, 
methods  and know-how. 
- Party( ies): means the collective or individual designation of the Buyer and the Seller. 
2. Applicability of the GTCS  
The GTCS  apply to all sales of Prod ucts by the Seller and set forth the terms  and 
conditions under which the Seller accepts  to supp ly the Products to the Buyer. 
The Buyer's  general terms  and conditions of purchase are express ly rejected . No 
spec ific condition issued by the Buyer which may appear  on the purchase  order  or on 
any document communicated by the Buyer, shall prevail over t he GTCS, u nless accepted  
in writing by the Seller. 
Unless expressly stated otherwise in Seller's offer , the Seller's offer is  valid for 30 (thirty) 
days  from date of issue . 
3. Orders  
Any order  placed  by the Buyer with the Seller implies the acceptance of these GTCS 
without any reservat ions. The orders  are only binding on the Seller subject to prior 
acceptance  in writing from the Seller. 
No order  modification shall be made  without the prior written consent of the Seller. Prices 
and delivery dates  shall be revised accord ingly. 
Orders  are not subject to cancellation. 
Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Seller, the minimum order  is 2000  euros 
(taxes excluded),  including 1000  euros per Product or the equivalent amount in the 
relevant currency if the price is not quoted in Euros . 
4. Delivery and transfer of risks 
Delivery dates  specified by the Seller on the order  confirmation are mere  guidance 
without any guarantee. Delivery after delivery the date specified  shall not be cause for  the 
Buyer to cancel the order,  reject the Products or claim damages.  
Except otherwise stated  on the order confirmation as per the Incoterm  or approved in 
writing by the Seller, the Prod ucts are delivered  FCA (Incoterms  ICC 2020), and 
notwithstanding any terms of delivery or paym ent of the transportat ion costs  agreed 
betwe en the Parties, the risks of loss or  damag ing shall pass  to the Buyer upon  collection 
of the Products by the first carrier at the Seller's premises, plants or warehou ses. 
5. Recept ion of the Products and Claims 
Upon receipt of the Products,  the Buyer shall examine carefully the conformity of the 
Products. Rem arks concerning shortages, excess,  alteration or appar ently damaged  
Products must be immed iately clearly noted on the transpor t documents. 
All claims relating to the Products must  be notified in writing to the Seller within 5 (five) 
days  from delivery.  In the event  Buyer fails to notify Seller of its claim within the above  
prescribed time, the Products shall be deemed  to have been irrevocab ly accepted  by the 
Buyer and no subsequen t claim for non-conformity of the Products or for obvious defects 
shall be valid. 
For any defect not reasonably noticeable by the Buyer upon receipt, despite a careful 
inspection, the Buyer shall  give not ice to the Seller with in 5 (five) days following the 
discovery of the defect, and in any event no later than 3 (three) months after delivery of 
the Produ cts. 
The Products may not be returned to the Seller without its prior written approva l. 
The Buyer must  justify the claim and grant the Seller a reaso nable opportu nity to inspect  
the Pro ducts (directly at the Buyer's  prem ises or by me ans of samples). The Buyer shall 
communicate to the Seller any element or informat ion necessary  to verify the claim. 
No claim will be valid once the Products have be en transferre d, reso ld to a third party or 
have undergone any treatment or processing. 
6. Prices 
All prices are net and exclusive of VAT or any other tax, customs  duties, delivery and 
insurance costs. Unless otherwise agreed, prices are quoted in euros FCA 
(Incoterms  ICC 2020). Regard ing stagge red deliveries related to a single order  or prices 
offers  including a limited duration of validity, the Seller reserves  the right to revise prices 
previously agreed  upon, at any time, in case  of a substantial rise in the price of labour or 
raw mater ials. 
7. Paym ent 
The invoices are payab le without discount to the Seller's invoicing address,  by bank 
transfer in euros and within 30 (thirty) days  from invoice date,  unless otherw ise agreed  in 
writing by the Seller or stated  on the invoice. 
Buyer shall have no right of set -off. 
Should the Buyer fail to settle one or several  invoices, the Seller reserves  the right to 
suspend further deliveries or to require security to be given. 
In accord ance with article L 441-10 of the French Code de Commerce,  in the event of 
delay in paym ent, overdue amounts shall bear interest  at the rate applied by the 
European Central Bank  to its most  recent main refinancing operation plus 10 percentage  
points, without prior notice of default being required, in addition to an indemnity for debt 
collection expenses  amounting to a lump sum of 40 eur os. 
8. Retention of title 
THE PRO DUCTS REMAIN THE ENTIRE PROPERTY  OF THE SELLER UNTIL FULL 
PAYME NT OF THE PUR CHASE PRICE  AND ALL ANCILLARY CHARGES . In the 
event  of overdue paym ent, the Seller is entitled to recover  possess ion of the Products 
at the Buyer's expense at any time until complete payme nt, without prejudice to claim 
damages.  
9. Warranty  
The Seller warra nts that the Products comply with the technical spec ifications provided 
by the Seller. 
ALL WARRANTIES OTHER  THAN THOSE SET FORTH IN THE GTCS, WHETHER  
EXPRESS  OR IMPL IED, INCLUDING  IMPLIED  WARRANTIES OF 
MERC HANTABILITY   AND   FITNESS   FOR   A   PARTICU LAR   PUR POSE, ARE  EXPRESSE LY EXCLUDED.  
The warranty shall not apply to the extent that: 
- the claim has not been submitted in accordance  with clause  5 above 
- the claim is not allowed  due to the transfer, resale, treatm ent or process ing of the 
Products by the Buyer or a third party.  
- the Buyer has breached its duty of care and made  an improper  use of the Products or 
failed to preserve  or store  the Products according to the Seller's instruct ions. 
In case  of non-conformity or proven defect acknowledged  by the Seller, the latter may,  at 
its sole discret ion, replace the Products at  its own expense or reimburse the defective 
Products. If Seller completes any of the foregoing remedies , it shall be the sole 
compensation for the defect iveness of the Products and be exclusive of any other 
comp ensation or damages  in respect thereof. 
10. Purpose  and preservat ion of the Products  
The Products are exclusively intended to be integrated  into the Buyer's final products. The 
Buyer is not allowed  to resell  the Prod ucts "as is" or to repackage  the Products in order 
to distribute the same to third parties without the prior written approval  of the Seller. 
It is the Buyer's  responsibility to ensure that the said final products comp ly with all 
applicable laws and regulations of the country in which the same  are markete d. 
The Seller shall not be held liable for the Product's suitability to the use intended by the 
Buyer, notwithstanding any informat ion given by the Seller. 
The Buyer undertakes  to handle, preserve  and store  Products in comp liance with the 
Seller's recomm endations and in a proper manner in considerat ion of the nature of the 
Products. 
11. Liability 
In no event shall the Seller be held liable for any special, indirect, incidental, punitive or 
consequential damages  of any kind, including, without limitation, loss of use, loss of 
profits or revenues or other economic loss. THE SELLER'S  AGGRE GATE LIABILITY, 
IN RESPE CT OF THE SALE OF THE PRODU CTS TO THE BUYER, SHALL NOT  
EXCEED THE AMOUNT OF THE ORD ER OF THE PRODUCTS HAVING GIVEN  RISE  
TO THE CLAIM. 
12. Intellectual Property  
All intellectual property rights related to the Products, including but not limited to patents, 
know-how,  trademar ks, copyr ights and any intellectual property  right whether registered  
or not, are and shall remain the exclusive property  of the Seller. 
No intellectual property  right is either assigned or granted to the Buyer as a result of the 
sale of the Products. The Se ller grants the Buyer a right to use the Products for the sole 
purpose of manufac turing and market ing the Buyer's  products.  
The Buyer may not apply for any intellectual property  title or seek  protect ion in respect of  
the Informat ion disclosed  by the Seller or  the inventions, know-how or techno logies 
deve loped  by the Seller and related to Products.  
13. Confidentiality 
The Information shall be held in strict confidence by the Buyer. The Buyer agrees  to hold 
the Information in confidence and not to disclose the same  to third parties nor to use 
the same for any purpose  other than express ly authorized by the Seller. 
This confidentiality obligation shall not expire by the pa ssage of time.  
The Buyer shall not perform  directly, or indirectly by way of a third party,  any analysis of 
the Products samp les, in order  to determine their chemical structure  or compo sition 
and/or manufacturing process. Samp les are supplied by the Seller for the exclusive 
purpose of evaluation and shall not be subject to commerc ial use. 
14. Personal data  
In accordance with Law No. 78 -17 of January 6, 1978 as amended and General Data 
Protection Regulation 2016/679 of April 27, 2016, pers onal data concerning t he Buyer is 
subject to computer processing by the Seller, acting as data controller, in order to car ry 
out processes related to the management of trade relations in the context of the supply of 
Products for the period strictly necessa ry for their completio n. For more information and 
exercise of the rights of the Buyer, the data protection officer of the Seller may be 
contacted at the e -mail address: dpo@mane.com . 
15. Force  Majeure 
The Seller shall not be held liable for the non-perform ance of any of its obligations when 
directly or indirectly due to an event of force majeure including but not limited to strike, 
lock-out, equipment breakd own, epidemic, defect  of raw mater ials or delays caused 
by a subcontractor  or a supplier, inability to pass the cost of a substantial rise in the price 
of labour or raw materials. 
The event of force  majeure suspends the perform ance of the Seller's obligations for the 
duration of the event. In case of an event of force  majeure exceed ing 3 (three ) months, 
each  Party  shall be entitled to terminate the unperformed  portion  of the order. 
16. Assignment or Transfer 
The Buyer shall neither transfer nor assign all or part of its rights and obligations 
hereunder  without the prior written consent of the Seller. 
17. Miscellaneous 
Failure by the Seller to exercise any of its rights shall not be deem ed to be a waiver of 
any such right in the future. 
If any of the provisions contained in these  GTCS  shall be illegal or unenforceab le for any 
cause or reason whatsoever,  such illegality or unenforceab ility shall not affect  the other 
provisions hereof. 
18. Languages  
In the event of any conflict between  the English version of the GTCS  and any translation 
into another language, the English version shall control. 
19. Applicable Law and Jurisdiction 
The GTCS  and all sales hereunder are governed  by French laws. Any dispute arising out 
of or in connect ion with the execution and/or interpre tation of the GTCS  shall be subject to 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the COU RTS OF NICE  (FRANCE).  INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)Contents
INTRODUCTION TO INCOTERMS(r) 2020  ...................... 1
RULES FOR ANY MODE OR MODES OF TRANSPORT  ......... 19
EXW | Ex Works  ...................................... 21
FCA | Free Carrier  .................................... 29
CPT | Carriage Paid To  ................................ 41
CIP | Carriage and Insurance Paid To  ..................... 51
DAP | Delivered at Place  ................................ 63
DPU | Delivered at Place Unloaded  ....................... 73
DDP | Delivered Duty Paid  .............................. 83
RULES FOR SEA AND INLAND WATERWAY TRANSPORT  ...... 91
FAS | Free Alongside Ship  .............................. 93
FOB | Free On Board  ................................. 103
CFR | Cost and Freight  ................................ 113
CIF | Cost Insurance and Freight  ....................... 123
ARTICLE-BY-ARTICLE TEXT OF RULES  .................... 135
INCOTERMS(r) 2020 DRAFTING GROUP  ..................... 183
INCOTERMS(r) PUBLICATIONS AND RESOURCES  ............. 189
OTHER INTERNATIONAL TRADE RELATED PUBLICATIONS  ... 192INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  1Introduction to Incoterms(r) 2020
1.	The purpose of the text of this Introduction is fourfold:
``to explain what the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules do and do NOT 
do and how they are best incorporated;
``to set out the important fundamentals of the Incoterms(r) 
rules: the basic roles and responsibilities of seller and buyer, 
delivery, risk, and the relationship between the Incoterms(r) 
rules and the contracts surrounding a typical contract  
of sale for export/import and also, where appropriate,  
for domestic sales;
``to explain how best to choose the right Incoterms(r) rule  
for the particular sale contract; and
``to set out the central changes between Incoterms(r) 2010  
and Incoterms(r) 2020.
2.	The Introduction follows this structure:
I.`What the Incoterms(r) rules do
II.`What the Incoterms(r) rules do NOT do
III. How best to incorporate the Incoterms(r) rules 
IV. Delivery, risk and costs in the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules 
V. Incoterms(r) 2020 rules and the carrier
VI.  Rules for the contract of sale and their relationship  
to other contracts 
VII. The eleven Incoterms(r) 2020 rules--"sea and inland 
waterway" and "any mode(s) of transport": getting  
it right
VIII. Order within the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules
IX. Differences between Incoterms(r) 2010  
and Incoterms(r) 2020
X. Caution with variants of Incoterms(r) rules
3.	This Introduction gives guidance on the use of, and about  
the fundamental principles behind, the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules. INCOTERMS(r) 2020
2 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) I. WHAT THE INCOTERMS(r) RULES DO
4.	The Incoterms(r) rules explain a set of eleven of the most 
 commonly-used three-letter trade terms, e.g. CIF, DAP, etc., 
reflecting business-to-business practice in contracts for the sale 
and purchase of goods. 
5.	The Incoterms(r) rules describe:
``Obligations: Who does what as between seller and buyer, 
e.g. who organises carriage or insurance of the goods  
or who obtains shipping documents and export or 
import licences;
``Risk: Where and when the seller "delivers" the goods,  
in other words where risk transfers from seller to buyer; and
``Costs : Which party is responsible for which costs, for 
example transport, packaging, loading or unloading costs, 
and checking or security-related costs.
The Incoterms(r) rules cover these areas in a set of ten articles, 
numbered A1/B1 etc., the A articles representing the seller's 
obligations and the B articles representing the buyer's obliga-
tions. See paragraph 53 below.
 II. WHAT THE INCOTERMS(r) RULES DO NOT DO
6.	The Incoterms(r) rules are NOT in themselves--and are therefore 
no substitute for--a contract of sale. They are devised to reflect 
trade practice for no particular type of goods--and for any . 
They can be used as much for the trading of a bulk cargo of 
iron ore as for five containers of electronic equipment or ten 
pallets of airfreighted fresh flowers. 
7.	The Incoterms(r) rules do NOT deal with the following matters:
``whether there is a contract of sale at all;
``the specifications of the goods sold;
``the time, place, method or currency of payment  
of the price; 
``the remedies which can be sought for breach  
of the contract of sale;
``most consequences of delay and other breaches  
in the performance of contractual obligations;
``the effect of sanctions;
``the imposition of tariffs; 
``export or import prohibitions; 
``force majeure or hardship;
``intellectual property rights; or
``the method, venue, or law of dispute resolution in case  
of such breach.INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  3Perhaps most importantly, it must be stressed that the 
 Incoterms(r) rules do NOT deal with the transfer of property/
title/ownership of the goods sold. 
8.	These are matters for which the parties need to make specific 
provision in their contract of sale. Failure to do so is likely to 
cause problems later if disputes arise about performance  
and breach. In essence, the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules are not 
themselves a contract of sale: they only become part of that 
contract when they are incorporated into a contract which 
already exists. Neither do the Incoterms(r) rules provide the law 
applicable to the contract. There may be legal regimes which 
apply to the contract, whether international, like the Conven-
tion on the International Sale of Goods (CISG);  
or domestic mandatory law relating, for example, to health  
and safety or the environment.
 III. HOW BEST TO INCORPORATE THE INCOTERMS(r) RULES 
9.	If parties want the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules to apply to their 
contract, the safest way to ensure this is to make that intention 
clear in their contract, through words such as
"[the chosen Incoterms(r) rule] [named port, place  
or point] Incoterms(r) 2020". 
10.	Thus, for example,  
CIF Shanghai Incoterms(r) 2020, or  
DAP No 123, ABC Street, Importland Incoterms(r) 2020.
11.	Leaving the year out could cause problems that may be 
difficult to resolve. The parties, a judge or an arbitrator need  
to be able to determine which version of the Incoterms(r) rules 
applies to the contract.
12.	The place named next to the chosen Incoterms(r) rule is even 
more important:
``in all Incoterms(r) rules except the C rules, the named place 
indicates where the goods are "delivered", i.e. where risk 
transfers from seller to buyer; 
``in the D rules, the named place is the place of delivery and 
also the place of destination and the seller must organise 
carriage to that point;
``in the C rules, the named place indicates the destination  
to which the seller must organise and pay for the carriage 
of the goods, which is not, however, the place or port  
of delivery. 
13.	Thus, an FOB sale raising doubt about the port of shipment 
leaves both parties uncertain as to where the buyer must 
present the ship to the seller for the shipment and the trans-
port of the goods--and as to where the seller must deliver the 
goods on board so as to transfer risk in the goods from seller 
to buyer. Again, a CPT contract with an unclear named INCOTERMS(r) 2020
4 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) destination will leave both parties in doubt as to the point  
to which the seller must contract and pay for the transport  
of the goods.
14.	It is best to avoid these types of issues by being as geographi-
cally specific as possible in naming the port, place  
or point, as the case may be, in the chosen Incoterms(r) rule.
15.	When incorporating a particular Incoterms(r) 2020 rule into a 
sale contract, it is not necessary to use the trademark symbol. 
For further guidance on trademark and copyright, please refer 
to https://iccwbo.org/incoterms-copyright/. 
 IV. DELIVERY, RISK AND COSTS IN THE 
INCOTERMS(r) 2020 RULES
16.	A named place or port attached to the three letters, e.g. CIP 
Las Vegas or CIF Los Angeles, then, is critical in the workings 
of the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules. Depending on which Incoterms(r) 
2020 rule is chosen, that place will identify either the place  
or port at which the goods are considered to have been 
"delivered" by the seller to the buyer, the place of "delivery",  
or the place or port to which the seller must organise the 
carriage of the goods, i.e. their destination; or, in the case  
of the D rules, both. 
17.	In all Incoterms(r) 2020 rules, A2 will define the place or port of 
"delivery"--and that place or port is closest to the seller in EXW 
and FCA (seller's premises) and closest to the buyer in DAP, 
DPU and DDP.
18.	The place or port of delivery identified by A2 is critical both  
for risk and for costs.
19.	The place or port of delivery under A2 marks the place at 
which risk transfers from seller to buyer under A3. It is at that 
place or port that the seller performs its obligation to provide 
the goods under the contract as reflected in A1 such that the 
buyer cannot recover against the seller for the loss of or 
damage to the goods occurring after that point has passed.
20.	The place or port of delivery under A2 also marks the central 
point under A9 which allocates costs to seller and buyer. In 
broad terms, A9 allocates costs before the point of delivery  
to the seller and costs after that point to the buyer. 
 Delivery points  
Extremes and in-betweens: the four traditional Incoterms(r) 
rules groups
21.	Versions of the Incoterms(r) rules before 2010 traditionally 
grouped the rules into four, namely E, F, C and D, with E and D 
lying at extreme poles from each other in terms of the point  
of delivery and the F and C rules lying in between. While the 
Incoterms(r) rules have, since 2010, been grouped according  INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  5to the means of transport used, the old groupings are still 
helpful in understanding the point of delivery. Thus, the 
delivery point in EXW is an agreed point for collection of the 
goods by the buyer, whatever the destination to which the 
buyer will take them. At the other extreme in DAP, DPU and 
DDP, the delivery point is the same as the destination point to 
which the seller or its carrier will carry the goods. In the first, 
EXW, risk transfers before the transport cycle even starts; in 
the second, the D rules, risk transfers very late in that cycle. 
Again, in the first, EXW and, for that matter, FCA (seller's 
premises), the seller performs its obligation to deliver the 
goods whether or not they actually arrive at their destination. 
In the second, the seller performs its obligation to deliver the 
goods only if they actually arrive at their destination.
22.	The two rules at the extreme ends of the Incoterms(r) rules are 
EXW and DDP. However, traders should consider alternative 
rules to these two for their international contracts. Thus, with 
EXW the seller has to merely put the goods at the buyer's 
disposal. This may cause problems for the seller and the buyer, 
respectively, with loading and export clearance. The seller 
would be better advised to sell under the FCA rule. Likewise, 
with DDP, the seller owes some obligations to the buyer which 
can only be performed within the buyer's country, for example 
obtaining import clearance. It may be physically or legally 
difficult for the seller to carry out those obligations within the 
buyer's country and a seller would therefore be better advised 
to consider selling goods in such circumstances under the DAP 
or DPU rules. 
23.	Between the two extremes of E and D rules, there lie the three 
F rules (FCA, FAS and FOB), and the four C rules (CPT, CIP, 
CFR and CIF).
24.	With all seven F and C rules, the place of delivery is on the 
seller's side of the anticipated carriage: consequently sales 
using these Incoterms(r) rules are often called "shipment" sales. 
Delivery occurs, for example, 
a)	when the goods are placed on board the vessel at the port 
of loading in CFR, CIF and FOB; or
b)	by handing the goods over to the carrier in CPT and CIP; or 
c)	by loading them on the means of transport provided by the 
buyer or placing them at the disposal of the buyer's carrier 
in FCA. 
In the F and C groups, risk transfers at the seller's end of the 
main carriage such that the seller will have performed its 
obligation to deliver the goods whether or not the goods 
actually arrive at their destination. This feature, of being 
shipment sales with delivery happening at the seller's end early INCOTERMS(r) 2020
6 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)in the transit cycle, is common to the F and the C rules, 
whether they are the maritime Incoterms(r) rules or the 
 Incoterms(r) rules intended for any mode[s] of transport. 
25.	The F and the C rules do, however, differ as to whether it is the 
seller or buyer who contracts for or arranges the carriage of 
the goods beyond the place or port of delivery. In the F rules, 
it is the buyer who makes such arrangements, unless the parties 
agree otherwise. In the C rules, this obligation falls to the seller.
26.	Given that a seller on any of the C rules contracts for or 
arranges the carriage of the goods beyond delivery, the parties 
need to know what the destination is to which it must arrange 
carriage--and that is the place attached to the name of the 
Incoterms(r) rule, e.g. "CIF the port of Dalian" or "CIP the inland 
city of Shenyang". Whatever that named destination is, that 
place is not and never becomes the place of delivery. Risk will 
have transferred on shipment or on handing over the goods at 
the place of delivery, but the contract of carriage must have 
been made by the seller for the named destination. Delivery 
and destination, then, in the C rules, are necessarily not the 
same place.
 V. INCOTERMS(r) 2020 RULES AND THE CARRIER 
27.	In the F and the C rules, placing the goods, for example, on 
board the vessel or handing them over to, or placing them at 
the disposal of, the carrier marks the point at which the goods 
are "delivered" by the seller to the buyer. Therefore this is the 
point at which risk transfers from the seller to the buyer. 
28.	Given those two important consequences, it becomes essential 
to identify who the carrier is where there is more than one 
carrier, each carrying out a separate leg of transport, for 
instance by road, rail, air or sea. Of course, where the seller has 
taken the far more prudent course of making one contract of 
carriage with one carrier taking responsibility for the entire 
carriage chain, in a so-called "through" contract of carriage,  
the problem does not arise. However, where there is no such 
"through" carriage contract, the goods could be handed over 
(where the CIP or CPT rules are used) to a road-haulier or rail 
company for onward transmission to a sea carrier. The same 
situation may  arise with exclusively maritime transport where, 
for example, the goods are first handed over to a river or 
feeder short-sea carrier for onward transmission to an 
ocean carrier. 
29.	In these situations, when does the seller "deliver" the goods to 
the buyer: when it hands the goods over to the first, second or 
third carrier? 
30.	Before we answer that question, a preliminary point. While  
in most cases the carrier will be an independent third party 
engaged under a contract of carriage by either the seller or the INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  7buyer (depending on whether the parties have chosen a C 
Incoterms(r) rule or an F Incoterms(r) rule), there are situations 
where no such independent third party is engaged at all 
because the seller or the buyer itself will carry the goods sold. 
This is more likely to happen in the D rules (DAP, DPU and 
DDP), where the seller may use its own means of transport  
to carry the goods to the buyer at the delivery destination. 
Provision has therefore been made in the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules 
for a seller under the D rules either to contract for carriage  
or to arrange for carriage, that is to say through its own means 
of transport: see A4. 
31.	The question asked at paragraph 29 above is not simply a 
"carriage" question: it is an important "sale" question. The 
question is not which carrier can a seller or buyer of goods 
damaged in transit sue under the contract of carriage. The 
"sale" question is: where there is more than one carrier involved 
in the carriage of the goods from seller to buyer, at which point 
in the carriage string does the handing over of the goods mark 
the point of delivery and the transfer of risk as between seller 
and buyer? 
32.	There needs to be a simple answer to this question because the 
relationships between the multiple carriers used, and between 
the seller and/or the buyer with those several carriers, will be 
complex, depending as they do on the terms of a number of 
separate contracts of carriage. Thus, for example, in any such 
chain of contracts of carriage, one carrier, such as a carrier 
actually performing a leg of the transit by road, may well act  
as the seller's agent in concluding a contract of carriage with  
a carrier by sea. 
33.	The Incoterms(r) 2020 rules give a clear answer to this question 
where the parties contract on FCA. In FCA, the relevant carrier 
is the carrier nominated by the buyer to whom the seller hands 
over the goods at the place or point agreed in the contract of 
sale. Thus even if a seller engages a road haulier to take the 
goods to the agreed delivery point, risk would transfer not at 
the place and time where the seller hands the goods over to 
the haulier engaged by the seller, but at the place and time 
where the goods are placed at the disposal of the carrier 
engaged by the buyer. This is why the naming of the place or 
point of delivery as precisely as possible is so important in FCA 
sales. The same situation can arise in FOB if a seller engages a 
feeder vessel or barge to take the goods to the vessel engaged 
by the buyer. A similar answer is provided by Incoterms(r)  2020: 
delivery occurs when the goods are placed on board the 
buyer's carrier. 
34.	With the C rules, the position is more complex and may well 
attract different solutions under different legal systems. In CPT 
and CIP, the relevant carrier is likely to be regarded, at any rate 
in some jurisdictions, as the first carrier to whom the seller INCOTERMS(r) 2020
8 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)hands over the goods under A2 (unless the parties have agreed 
on the point of delivery). The buyer knows nothing of the 
contractual arrangements made between the seller and the 
first or subsequent carriers, or indeed between that first carrier 
and subsequent carriers. What the buyer does know, however, 
is that the goods are "in transit" to him or her--and that 
"transit" starts as far as the buyer knows, when the goods are 
put by the seller into the hands of the first carrier. The conse-
quence is that risk transfers from seller to buyer at that early 
stage of "delivery" to the first carrier. The same situation can 
arise in CFR and CIF if a seller engages a feeder vessel or barge 
to take the goods to the agreed port of shipment, if any. A 
similar answer might be suggested in some legal systems: 
delivery occurs when the goods are placed on board the vessel 
at the agreed port of shipment, if any. 
35.	Such a conclusion, if adopted, may seem harsh on the buyer. 
Risk would transfer from seller to buyer in CPT and CIP sales 
when the goods are handed over to the first carrier. The buyer 
does not know at that stage whether or not that first carrier is 
responsible for loss of or damage to the goods under the 
relevant carriage contract. The buyer is not a party to that 
contract, has no control over it and will not know its terms.  
Yet, despite this, the buyer would end up bearing the risk in the 
goods from the very earliest moment of handing over, possibly 
without recovery against that first carrier. 
36.	While the buyer would end up bearing the risk of loss of or 
damage to the goods at an early stage of the transport chain,  
it would, on this view however, have a remedy against the 
seller. A2/A3 do not operate in a vacuum: under A4, the seller 
must contract for the carriage of the goods "from the agreed 
point of delivery, if any, at the place of delivery to the named 
place of destination or, if agreed, any point at that place." Even 
if risk has transferred to the buyer at the time the goods were 
handed over to the first carrier under A2/A3, if that first carrier 
does not undertake responsibility under its contract of carriage 
for the through carriage of the goods to the named destina -
tion, the seller, on this view, would remain liable to the buyer 
under A4. In essence, the seller should make a contract of 
carriage to the destination named under the contract of sale. 
 VI. RULES FOR THE CONTRACT OF SALE AND THEIR 
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CONTRACTS
37.	This discussion of the role of the carrier in the delivery of the 
goods as between the seller and the buyer in the C and F 
Incoterms(r) rules raises the question: what role do the 
 Incoterms(r) rules play in the contract of carriage, or, indeed,  
in any of the other contracts typically surrounding an export 
contract, for example an insurance contract or a letter 
of credit? INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  938.	The short answer is that the Incoterms(r) rules do not form part 
of those other contracts: where incorporated, the Incoterms(r) 
rules apply to and govern only certain aspects of the contract 
of sale. 
39.	This is not the same as saying, however, that the Incoterms(r) 
rules have no impact on those other contracts. Goods are 
exported and imported through a network of contracts that,  
in an ideal world, should match the one with the other. Thus, 
the sale contract, for example, will require the tender of a 
transport document issued by the carrier to the seller/shipper 
under a contract of carriage and against which the seller/
shipper/beneficiary might wish to be paid under a letter of 
credit. Where the three contracts match, things go well; where 
they do not, problems rapidly arise. 
40.	What the Incoterms(r) rules say, for example, about carriage or 
transport documents (in A4/B4 and A6/B6), or what they say 
about insurance cover (A5/B5), does not bind the carrier or 
the insurer or any of the banks involved. Thus, a carrier is only 
bound to issue a transport document as required by the 
contract of carriage it makes with the other party to that  
contract: it is not bound to issue a transport document com-
plying with the Incoterms(r) rules. Likewise, an insurer is bound 
to issue a policy to the level and in the terms agreed with the 
party purchasing the insurance, not a policy which complies 
with the Incoterms(r) rules. Finally, a bank will look only at the 
documentary requirements in the letter of credit, if any, not at 
the requirements of the sales contract.
41.	However, it is very much in the interests of all the parties to the 
different contracts in the network to ensure that the carriage  
or insurance terms they have agreed with the carrier or insurer, 
or the terms of a letter of credit, comply with what the sale 
contract says about ancillary contracts that need to be made 
or documents that need to be obtained and tendered. That 
task does not fall on the carrier, the insurer or the bank, none  
of whom are party to the contract of sale and none of whom 
are, therefore, party to or bound by the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules. 
It is, however, in the seller's and buyer's interest to try to ensure 
that the different parts of the network of contracts match--and 
the starting point is the sale contract--and therefore, where 
they apply, the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules. 
 VII. THE ELEVEN INCOTERMS(r) 2020 RULES--"SEA 
AND INLAND WATERWAY" AND "ANY MODE(S) OF 
TRANSPORT": GETTING IT RIGHT
42.	The main distinction introduced in the Incoterms(r) 2010 rules, 
that between Rules for any Mode or Modes of Transport  
(comprising EXW, FCA, CPT, CIP, DAP, the newly named INCOTERMS(r) 2020
10 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)DPU--the old DAT--and DDP), and Rules for Sea and Inland 
Waterway Transport, (comprising FAS, FOB, CFR and CIF)  
has been retained. 
43.	The four so-called "maritime" Incoterms(r) rules are intended for 
use where the seller places the goods on board (or in FAS 
alongside) a vessel at a sea or river port. It is at this point that 
the seller delivers the goods to the buyer. When these rules are 
used, the risk of loss of or damage to those goods is on the 
buyer's shoulders from that port. 
44.	The seven Incoterms(r) rules for any mode or modes of transport 
(so-called "multi-modal"), on the other hand, are intended for 
use where
a)	the point at which the seller hands the goods over to,  
or places them at the disposal of, a carrier, or 
b)	the point at which the carrier hands the goods over to the 
buyer, or the point at which they are placed at the disposal 
of the buyer, or
c)	both points (a) and (b) 
are not on board (or in FAS alongside) a vessel. 
45.	Where delivery happens and risk transfers in each of these 
seven Incoterms(r) rules will depend on which particular rule is 
used. For example, in CPT, delivery happens at the seller's end 
when the goods are handed over to the carrier contracted by 
the seller. In DAP, on the other hand, delivery happens when 
the goods are placed at the buyer's disposal at the named 
place or point of destination.
46.	The order in which the Incoterms(r) 2010 rules were presented 
has, as we have said, been largely retained in Incoterms(r)  2020  
and it is important to underline the distinction between the two 
families of Incoterms(r) rules so that the right rule is used for the 
contract of sale depending on the means of transport used. 
47.	One of the most frequent problems in the use of the Incoterms(r) 
rules is the choice of the wrong rule for the particular type 
of contract. 
48.	Thus, for example, an FOB inland point (for example an airport 
or a warehouse) sale contract makes little sense: what type of 
contract of carriage must the buyer make? Does the buyer owe 
the seller an obligation to make a contract of carriage under 
which the carrier is bound to take over the goods at the named 
inland point or at the nearest port to that point? 
49.	Again, a CIF named sea port sale contract where the buyer 
expects the goods to be brought to an inland point in the 
buyer's country makes little sense. Must the seller procure a 
contract of carriage and insurance cover to the eventual inland 
destination intended by the parties or to the seaport named in 
the sale contract? INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  1150.	Gaps, overlaps and unnecessary costs are likely to arise--and all 
this because the wrong Incoterms(r) rule has been chosen for 
the particular contract. What makes the mismatch "wrong" is 
that insufficient regard has been given to the two most 
important features of the Incoterms(r) rules, features which are 
mirrors of each other, namely the port, place or point of 
delivery and the transfer of risks. 
51.	The reason for the frequent misuse of the wrong Incoterms(r) 
rule is that Incoterms(r) rules are frequently regarded exclusively 
as price indicators: this or that is the EXW, FOB, or DAP price. 
The initials used in the Incoterms(r) rules are doubtless handy 
abbreviations for the formula used in the calculation of the 
price. Incoterms(r) rules are not, however, exclusively, or even 
primarily, price indicators. They are a list of general obligations 
that sellers and buyers owe each other under well-recognised 
forms of sale contract--and one of their main tasks is to 
indicate the port, place or point of delivery where the risk 
is transferred. 
 VIII. ORDER WITHIN THE INCOTERMS(r) 2020 RULES
52.	All the ten A/B articles in each of the Incoterms(r) rules are 
important--but some are more important than others. 
53.	There has, indeed, been a radical shake-up in the internal order 
in which the ten articles within each Incoterms(r) rule have been 
organised. In Incoterms(r) 2020, the internal order within each 
Incoterms(r) rule now follows this sequence:
A1/B1 General obligations
A2/B2 Delivery/Taking delivery
A3/B3 Transfer of risks 
A4/B4 Carriage
A5/B5 Insurance
A6/B6 Delivery/transport document
A7/B7 Export/import clearance
A8/B8 Checking/packaging/marking
A9/B9 Allocation of costs
A10/B10 Notices
54.	It will be noticed that concerning the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules, 
after recording in A1/B1 the basic goods/payment obligations 
of the parties, Delivery and the Transfer of risks are moved to a 
more prominent location, namely to A2 and A3 respectively.
55.	The broad sequence thereafter goes: 
``ancillary contracts (A4/B4 and A5/B5, carriage and 
insurance); 
``transport documents (A6/B6); INCOTERMS(r) 2020
12 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)``export/import clearance (A7/B7); 
``packaging (A8/B8); 
``costs (A9/B9); and 
``notices (A10/B10).
56.	It is appreciated that this change in the order of the A/B 
articles will take some time--and cost--to become familiar. It is 
hoped that with delivery and risk now made more prominent, 
traders will find it easier to identify the differences among the 
various Incoterms(r) rules, i.e. the different points in time and 
place at which the seller "delivers" the goods to the buyer with 
risk transferring to the buyer from that time and point.
57.	For the first time, the Incoterms(r) rules are published both in the 
traditional format setting out the eleven Incoterms(r) rules and  
in a new "horizontal" format setting out the ten articles within 
each Incoterms(r) rule under each of the headings listed above  
in paragraph 53, first for the seller and then for the buyer. 
Traders can therefore now far more easily see the difference, 
for example, between the place of delivery in FCA and the 
place of delivery in DAP; or the items of cost which fall on  
a buyer in CIF when compared with the items of cost which  
fall on a buyer in CFR. It is hoped that this "horizontal" rep-
resentation of the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules will further assist 
traders in choosing the Incoterms(r) rule most appropriate to 
their commercial requirements. 
 IX. DIFFERENCES BETWEEN INCOTERMS(r) 2010 AND 2020
58.	The most important initiative behind the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules 
has been to focus on how the presentation could be enhanced 
to steer users towards the right Incoterms(r) rule for their sale 
contract. Thus:
a)	a greater emphasis in this Introduction on making the right 
choice; 
b)	a clearer explanation of the demarcation and connection 
between the sale contract and its ancillary contracts; 
c)	upgraded Guidance Notes presented now as Explanatory 
Notes to each Incoterms(r) rule; and
d)	a re-ordering within the Incoterms(r) rules giving delivery  
and risk more prominence.
All these changes, though cosmetic in appearance, are in 
reality substantial attempts on the part of ICC to assist the 
international trading community towards smoother export/
import transactions.
59.	Apart from these general changes, there are more substantive 
changes in the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules when compared with 
Incoterms(r) 2010. Before looking at those changes, mention 
must be made of a particular development in trade practice INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  13which occurred since 2010 and which ICC has decided should 
not lead to a change in the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules, namely 
Verified Gross Mass (VGM).
60.	Note on Verified Gross Mass (VGM)--Since 1 July 2016, 
Regulation 2 under the International Convention for the Safety 
of Life at Sea (SOLAS) imposed on shippers in the case of the 
shipment of containers the obligation either to weigh the 
packed container using calibrated and certified equipment,  
or to weigh the contents of the container and add the weight 
of the container when empty. In either case, the VGM is to be 
recorded with the carrier. A failure to comply bears the 
sanction under the SOLAS Convention that the container 
"should not be loaded onto a ship": see paragraph 4.2,  
MSC1/Circ.1475, 9 June 2014.
These weighing operations obviously incur expense and failure 
may lead to delay in loading. As this happened after 2010, it is 
unsurprising that there was some pressure in the consultations 
leading to Incoterms(r) 2020 for a clear indication to be given as 
to who, as between seller and buyer, should bear such 
obligations. 
61.	It was felt by the Drafting Group that obligations and costs 
relating to VGM were too specific and complex to warrant 
explicit mention in the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules.
62.	Returning to the changes made by ICC to the Incoterms(r) 2010 
rules in the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules, these are: 
[a] Bills of lading with an on-board notation and the FCA 
Incoterms(r) rule
[b] Costs, where they are listed
[c] Different levels of insurance cover in CIF and CIP 
[d] Arranging for carriage with seller's or buyer's own 
means of transport in FCA, DAP, DPU and DDP
[e] Change in the three-letter initials for DAT to DPU
[f] Inclusion of security-related requirements within 
carriage obligations and costs
[g] Explanatory Notes for Users
[a] Bills of lading with an on-board notation and the FCA 
Incoterms(r) rule
63.	Where goods are sold FCA for carriage by sea, sellers or 
buyers (or more likely their banks where a letter of credit is in 
place) might want a bill of lading with an on-board notation.
64.	However, delivery under the FCA rule is completed before the 
loading of the goods on board the vessel. It is by no means 
certain that the seller can obtain an on-board bill of lading from 
the carrier. That carrier is likely, under its contract of carriage, 
to be bound and entitled to issue an on-board bill of lading 
only once the goods are actually on board.INCOTERMS(r) 2020
14 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)65.	To cater for this situation, FCA A6/B6 of Incoterms(r)  2020 now 
provides for an additional option. The buyer and the seller can 
agree that the buyer will instruct its carrier to issue an on-board 
bill of lading to the seller after the loading of the goods, the 
seller then being obliged to tender that bill of lading to the 
buyer, typically through the banks. ICC recognises that, despite 
this somewhat unhappy union between an on-board bill of 
lading and FCA delivery, this caters for a demonstrated need  
in the marketplace. Finally, it should be emphasised that even 
where this optional mechanism is adopted, the seller is under 
no obligation to the buyer as to the terms of the contract 
of carriage.
66.	Does it remain true to say that where containerised goods are 
delivered by seller to buyer by handing over to a carrier before 
loading onto a ship, the seller is well advised to sell on FCA 
terms rather than on FOB terms? The answer to that question 
is Yes. Where Incoterms(r)  2020 have made a difference, 
however, is that where such a seller still wants or needs a bill  
of lading with an on-board notation, the new additional option 
in the FCA term A6/B6 makes provision for such a document.
[b] Costs, where they are listed
67.	In the new ordering of the articles within the Incoterms(r) 2020 
rules, costs now appear at A9/B9 of each Incoterms(r) rule. 
Apart from that re-location, however, there is another change 
that will become obvious to users early on. The various costs 
which fall to be allocated by various articles within the Inco-
terms(r) rules have traditionally appeared in different parts of 
each Incoterms(r) rule. Thus, for example, costs related to the 
obtaining of a delivery document in FOB 2010 were mentioned 
in A8, the article under the heading "Delivery Document", but 
not in A6, the article under the heading "Allocation of Costs". 
68.	In the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules, however, the equivalent of A6/B6, 
namely A9/B9, now lists all the costs allocated by each 
particular Incoterms(r) rule. A9/B9 in the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules 
are consequently longer than A6/B6 in the Incoterms(r) 
2010 rules. 
69.	The purpose is to provide users with a one-stop list of costs,  
so that the seller or buyer can now find in one place all the 
costs for which it would be responsible under that particular 
 Incoterms(r) rule. Items of cost are also mentioned in their home 
article: thus, for example, the costs involved in obtaining 
documents in FOB still also appear at A6/B6 as well as at  
A9/B9. The thinking here was that users interested in 
discovering the specific allocation of documentary costs  
might be more inclined to go to the specific article dealing  
with delivery documents rather than to the general article 
listing all the costs. INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  15[c] Different levels of insurance cover in CIF and CIP 
70.	In the Incoterms(r) 2010 rules, A3 of both CIF and CIP imposed 
on the seller the obligation to "obtain at its own expense cargo 
insurance complying at least with the minimum cover as 
provided by Clauses (C) of the Institute Cargo Clauses (Lloyd's 
Market Association/International Underwriting Association 
'LMA/IUA') or any similar clauses." Institute Cargo Clauses (C) 
provide cover for a number of listed risks, subject to itemised 
exclusions; Institute Cargo Clauses (A), on the other hand, 
cover "all risks", again subject to itemised exclusions. During 
the consultations leading to the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules, the case 
was made for moving from Institute Cargo Clauses (C) to 
Institute Cargo Clauses (A), thus increasing the cover obtained 
by the seller for the benefit of the buyer. This could, of course, 
also involve an additional cost in premium. The contrary case, 
namely to stay with Institute Cargo Clauses (C), was equally 
strongly put, particularly by those involved in the maritime 
trade of commodities. After considerable discussion within and 
beyond the Drafting Group, the decision was made to provide 
for different minimum cover in the CIF Incoterms(r) rule and in 
the CIP Incoterms(r) rule. In the first, which is much more likely 
to be used in the maritime commodity trades, the status quo 
has been retained, with Institute Cargo Clauses (C) as the 
default position, although it is, of course, open to the parties to 
agree to higher cover. In the second, namely the CIP Incoterms(r) 
rule, the seller must now obtain insurance cover complying 
with Institute Cargo Clauses (A), although it is, of course, again 
open to the parties to agree on a lower level of cover.
[d] Arranging for carriage with seller's or buyer's own means  
of transport in FCA, DAP, DPU and DDP
71.	In the Incoterms(r) 2010 rules, it was assumed throughout that 
where the goods were to be carried from the seller to the 
buyer, they would be carried by a third-party carrier engaged 
for the purpose either by the seller or the buyer, depending  
on which Incoterms(r) rule was used.
72.	It became clear in the deliberations leading to Incoterms(r)  2020, 
however, that there were some situations where, although the 
goods were to be carried from the seller to the buyer, they 
could be so carried without any third-party carrier being 
engaged at all. Thus, for example, there was nothing stopping 
a seller on a D rule from arranging for such carriage without 
outsourcing that function to a third party, namely by using its 
own means of transportation. Likewise, with an FCA purchase, 
there was nothing to stop the buyer from using its own vehicle 
for the collection of the goods and for their transport to the 
buyer's premises. INCOTERMS(r) 2020
16 | INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC)73.	The rules appeared not to take account of these eventualities. 
The Incoterms(r) 2020 rules now do, by expressly allowing not 
only for the making of a contract of carriage, but also for 
simply arranging for the necessary carriage.
[e] Change in the three-letter initials for DAT to DPU
74.	The only difference between DAT and DAP in the Incoterms(r) 
2010 rules was that in DAT the seller delivered the goods once 
unloaded from the arriving means of transport into a "terminal"; 
whereas in DAP, the seller delivered the goods when the goods 
were placed at the disposal of the buyer on the arriving means 
of transport for unloading. It will also be recalled that the 
Guidance Note for DAT in Incoterms(r)  2010 defined the word 
"terminal" broadly to include "any place, whether covered 
or not...". 
75.	ICC decided to make two changes to DAT and DAP. First, the 
order in which the two Incoterms(r) 2020 rules are presented  
has been inverted, and DAP, where delivery happens before 
unloading, now appears before DAT. Secondly, the name  
of the rule DAT has been changed to DPU (Delivered at Place 
Unloaded), emphasising the reality that the place of destination 
could be any place and not only a "terminal". However, if that 
place is not in a terminal, the seller should make sure that the 
place where it intends to deliver the goods is a place where it is 
able to unload the goods.
[f] Inclusion of security-related requirements within carriage 
obligations and costs
76.	It will be recalled that security-related requirements made a 
rather subdued entry into the Incoterms(r) 2010 rules, through 
A2/B2 and A10/B10 in each rule. The Incoterms(r) 2010 rules 
were the first revision of the Incoterms(r) rules to come into force 
after security-related concerns became so prevalent in the 
early part of this century. Those concerns, and the associated 
shipping practices which they have created in their wake, are 
now much more established. Connected as they are to carriage 
requirements, an express allocation of security-related 
obligations has now been added to A4 and A7 of each 
Incoterms(r) rule. The costs incurred by these requirements are 
also now given a more prominent position in the costs article, 
namely A9/B9. 
[g] Explanatory Notes for Users
77.	The Guidance Notes appearing at the start of each Incoterms(r) 
rule in the 2010 version now appear as "Explanatory Notes for 
Users". These Notes explain the fundamentals of each 
 Incoterms(r) 2020 rule, such as when it should be used, when 
risk transfers and how costs are allocated between seller and 
buyer. The Explanatory Notes are intended (a) to help the 
user accurately and efficiently steer towards the appropriate INCOTERMS(r) 2020
INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (ICC) |  17Incoterms(r) rule for a particular transaction; and (b) to provide 
those deciding or advising on disputes or contracts governed 
by Incoterms(r) 2020 with guidance on matters which might 
require interpretation. For guidance on more fundamental 
issues that cut across the Incoterms(r) 2020 rules more gener-
ally, reference may, of course, also be made to the text of 
this Introduction.
 X. CAUTION WITH VARIANTS OF INCOTERMS(r) RULES
78.	Sometimes the parties want to alter an Incoterms(r) rule. The 
Incoterms(r) 2020 rules do not prohibit such alteration, but 
there are dangers in so doing. In order to avoid any unwel-
come surprises, the parties would need to make the intended 
effect of such alterations extremely clear in their contract. 
Thus, for example, if the allocation of costs in the Incoterms(r) 
2020 rules is altered in the contract, the parties should also 
clearly state whether they intend to vary the point at which 
delivery is made and the risk transfers to the buyer. 
Charles Debattista* 
Special ICC Advisor  
Incoterms(r) 2020 Drafting Group
36 Stone  
Gray's Inn  
London
* I am very grateful for comments received on earlier drafts of this personal 
Introduction to the new rules, both from ICC national committees and from my 
colleagues on the Drafting Group. The views expressed in this Introduction, 
however, remain my own and do not therefore form part of the Incoterms(r) 2020 
rules themselves.EXW  Ex Works 
(Insert named place of 
delivery) Incoterms(r) 2020
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
FCA  Free Carrier
(Insert named place of 
delivery) Incoterms(r) 2020
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
CPT  Carriage Paid To
(Insert named place of 
destination) Incoterms(r) 2020
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalitiesCOSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
FAS  Free Alongside Ship  
(Insert named port of loading) Incoterms(r) 2020 
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
FOB  Free on Board
(Insert named port of loading) Incoterms(r) 2020 
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalitiesCFR  Cost and Freight
(Insert named port of destination) Incoterms(r) 2020 
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalitiesCOSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
CIF  Cost, Insurance and Freight 
(Insert named port of destination) Incoterms(r) 2020 
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
INSURANCE
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalitiesCIP  Carriage and Insurance Paid To
(Insert named place of 
destination) Incoterms(r) 2020
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
INSURANCE
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
DAP  Delivered at Place 
(Insert named place of 
destination) Incoterms(r) 2020
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
DPU  Delivered at Place Unloaded
(Insert named place of 
destination) Incoterms(r) 2020
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalities
DDP  Delivered Duty Paid
(Insert named place of 
destination) Incoterms(r) 2020
COSTS COSTS
RISKS RISKS
Export 
formalitiesImport 
formalitiesRULES FOR ANY MODE OR MODES OF TRANSPORT
RULES FOR SEA AND INLAND WATERWAY TRANSPORT
WARNING : This chart is not intended to be used alone, and should always be used in conjunction 
with the Incoterms(r) 2020 rule book.
(c) 2019 International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced, 
copied, distributed, translated or adapted in any form or by any means (whether graphic, electronic or mechanical, 
and including without limitation photocopying, scanning, recording, taping, or by use of computer, the internet or 
information retrieval systems) without written permission of ICC through ICC Services, Publications department. 
"Incoterms" is a registered trademark of the International Chamber of Commerce.TRANSPORT OBLIGATIONS,  
COSTS AND RISKS
Blue indicates seller's   Gold  indicates buyer's   Green  indicates mixed or shared
ICC Knowledge 2 Go: 2go.iccwbo.orgINTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
Frequently Asked Questions 
Mane Legal & IP Department June 19 2020 Page 1 of 1  
This document of FAQs serves as a brief introduction to intellectual property rights. It is intended to provide a 
short introduction to the basics. Any specific questions should be referred to MANE's Legal and IP Department. 
 
1. What is intellectual property? 
Intellectual property (IP) refers to creations of the mind, such as inventions; literary and artistic works; designs; 
and symbols, names and images used in commerce. 
 
IP is protected in specific laws, which enable people to earn recognition or financial benefit from what they invent 
or create. By striking the right balance between the interests of innovators and the wider public interest, the IP 
system aims to foster an environment in which creativity and innovation can flourish. 
 
2. What are the common types of IP? 
PATENTS 
REGISTERED DESIGNS (or Design Patent) 
TRADEMARKS 
COPYRIGHTS 
TRADE SECRETS 
 
3. What is a patent? 
A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or a process that provides, in general, 
a new product or way of doing something, or offers a new technical solution to a technical problem. 
 
Patents protect the features and processes that make things work. Patent rights let inventors profit from their 
inventions. 
 
Patent protection means an invention cannot be commercially made, used, distributed or sold without the patent 
owner's consent.  Patent rights are usually enforced in courts that, in most systems, hold the authority to stop 
patent infringement. Conversely, a court can also declare a patent invalid upon a successful challenge by a third 
party. 
 
4. What is a trademark? 
A trademark is a distinctive sign or mark, which identifies certain goods or services as those produced or provided 
by a specific person or enterprise. 
 
5. What can be registered as a trademark? 
Words; Logos; Slogans; Sounds; Colors; Shapes; Smells. 
 
6. What is a Registered Design? 
A design is the ornamental or aesthetic aspect of an article. The design may consist of three-dimensional 
features, such as the shape or surface of an article, or of two-dimensional features, such as patterns, lines or 
color. 
 
7. What is copyright? 
Copyright is the set of exclusive rights granted to the creator of an original work (e.g. a piece of music, song 
lyrics, films, novels, photographs, paintings, web pages) including the right to copy, distribute and adapt the 
work. Like all of the other IP rights, these rights can be licensed, transferred and/or assigned. 
 
8. What is an intellectual property licensing agreement? 
A licensing agreement involves the transfer of intellectual property rights, and potentially proprietary knowledge, 
in return for royalty as revenue from one company or individual to another. 
 
 
  
INVENTORSHIP 
Frequently Asked Questions 
 
MANE Legal & IP Department May 12, 2021 Page 1 of 1 
 This document of FAQs serves as a brief introduction to the concept of "inventorship". Any 
specific questions should be referred to MANE's Legal and IP Department . 
 
1. What information is necessary to identify an inventor? 
The determination of inventorship is a legal conclusion based on facts.  Accordingly, 
specific details characterizing each contributor's work on the project must be detailed in the 
Patentability Study Request Form . 
While most, if not all, patent statutes around the world fail to provide a precise definition 
of "inventor," it is globally accepted that an inventor must have contributed to the conception of 
some aspect of the inventive  features (i.e., novel and/or non-obvious) of the invention.  
Conception, which is the key to inventorship, may be defined as the formation in the mind of an 
inventor of a definite and permanent idea of the complete and operative invention as it is 
thereafter put into practice.  And because inventions are defined by the claims, an inventor must 
be able to point to at least one element in at least one claim that (s)he conceived.  Additionally, 
those claim element(s) must be one of the inventive (novel or non-obvious) elements.   
If requested, the project leader may be required to submit evidence of contribution for 
each person, e.g., laboratory notebook pages or reports, showing the conception of at least one 
inventive element of the claimed invention. 
 
2. My colleague and I worked together on the project, who is the inventor? 
When two or more people collaborate in conceiving a claimed invention, then those 
people are joint inventors. Each joint inventor must be aware of the contribution of the other and 
each must contribute to the formation of the solution to a problem that is the invention. Thus, 
joint inventorship is the process by which people cooperate to solve a problem and in which 
each person makes some mental contribution to the final conception of the solution. The entire 
inventive concept need not occur to each of the joint inventors and they need not physically work 
on the project together or at the same time. Nor do their contributions need to be the same or 
equal. All that is required is collaboration and contribution to the conception of at least one of the 
claims in the patent application.  
Please note that merely being present during a meeting, providing research support, 
setting up experiments at the instruction of another, analytical testing, or simply instructing 
others to perform research does not, by itself, indicate a contribution to the conception of the 
invention.  
 
3. Who is responsible for identifying inventors? 
Patent Counsel at MANE bears the responsibility, in association with preparing a patent 
application, to identifying the inventor(s). Consequently, successfully identifying inventor(s) 
involves assessing the nature of contribution by each person. This assessment is necessary to 
permit the applicant to meet its legal obligation in most, if not all, of the national patent offices to 
provide to an accurate listing of inventors on a patent application.  
Failure to provide an accurate list of inventors may, in some circumstances, compromise 
the validity and enforceability of the resulting patent. Inadvertently naming or omitting an inventor 
is generally a correctable error, but intentionally naming or omitting an inventor can result in the 
patent being found unenforceable against alleged infringers.   
 MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 1 of 10 
  
 
 
OBJECT IVE:   
 The intent of this policy is to provide clear and consistent instructions regarding 
acceptable steps and measures  for creating a permanent  and legally -sufficient  record of 
research and development activities  by MANE  group employees, contractors, interns, 
externs, or other persons conducting  research related activitie s on behalf of the MANE  
group . 
 
SCOPE OF APPLICATION:   
 This policy specifically governs acceptable practices  relating to creation  and retention of  
all research and development records at MANE 's R&D/Innovation  Centers worldwide .  
This policy , which  is based on and consistent with Procedure ITG-DS-001/08 of           
V. MANE FILS , applies to all MANE  employees , trainees, or any other persons  having a 
contractual obligation to assign  or license  intellectual property rights to any direct or 
indirect affiliate of V. MANE FILS .  
 
  
 
CONTENTS:  
 
1. Laboratory N otebook  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  2 
1.1.  Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  2 
1.2.  Model and storage  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  3 
1.3.  Attribution and classification  ................................ ................................ ..........................  3 
1.4.  Property and confidentiality  ................................ ................................ ............................  4 
 
2. Instructions for R ecording  Information  ................................ ................................ ...................  4 
2.1.  General R ules Regarding  Form ................................ ................................ .......................  5 
2.2.  General R ules Regarding S ubstance  ................................ ................................ ...............  6 
2.3.  Required Duties of Author and Witness  ................................ ................................ ..........  7 
 
3. Certification  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  8 
 
4. Archiving  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 8 
 
Appendix:  Laboratory Record keeping Procedure  (per manufacturer)  ................................ ........  10 
 
 
 
 
  
MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 2 of 10 
 1. Laboratory Notebook  
 
1.1. Functions  and objectives  
 
Research and development (R&D) refers to innovative activities toward developing new 
products, processes, or equipment , or improvements in  existing products, processes, or 
equipment .  To that end, all R&D work involving new products, processes, equipment, or 
modification of existing products, processes, or equipment must be evaluated to assess 
novelty and obviousness (inventive step).  All M ane researchers, engineers, technicians, 
trainees, interns,  in charge of product or production process development work  shall utilize a 
company -issued laboratory notebook to record any R&D  work  that foreseeably involves the 
creation of new, nonobvious, and commercially relevant products, processes, or equipment.  
 
The primary purpose of a laboratory notebook is to preserve and protect i ntellectu al 
property rights in all  new and improved products, proc esses, or equipment  by serving as a 
record and archive for all research and development work (ideas, experiments, formulations, 
etc.).  A laboratory notebook , when properly utilized , may be used as legal evidence  with 
respec t to various aspects of the new or improved methods/products , such as conception 
and/or reduction to practice of an invention and date (s) corresponding thereto,  test results , 
and the like .   
 
In this respect, laboratory notebooks  enable  inventors : 
 To record and provide an accounting  of the intellectual and technical progress 
correspond ing to each project carried out;  
 To explain the manner in which  an experiment was carried out and how the result(s) 
of that experiment was obtained, and thus serve as the definitive account of what 
transpired, which  thereby ensure s the rep roducibility of the experiment ; and  
 To ensure the preservation of information  which  may be useful  for both internal and 
external communications  (e.g., writing scientific publications, preparing 
presentations, drafting o f patent applications, transfer of technology, etc.).  
 
By following the steps prescribed herein  for their implementation, MANE  laboratory 
notebooks  will possess the  authenticity to serve as  evidentiary tools  in the event of  
litigation (s), dispute (s), or claim (s).  Proper implementation of the prescribed  procedure will 
create laboratory notebooks that can be used : 
 To certify that , on a specified date, the holder  possessed the information contained 
therein  (e.g., experimental results, scientific observation, working hypotheses , etc.);  
 To specifically define  the information created by the holder, such as  working 
hypothesis, reflection s, experimental  designs and results, which may assist with 
determining  inventorship, establishing invention rights , and providing data for patent 
filings ; and  
 To provide  a factual accounting toward the degree of participation (e.g., intellectual 
and material contribution ) of an individual and/or a compan y in the design of an 
invention . 
 
Accordingly, a properly documented laboratory notebook  make s it possible to capitalize 
on the knowledge and know -how of researchers / laboratories / companies.  As such, they are 
an essential component of the heritage of V. MANE FILS , and the rest of the MANE Group . 
 MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 3 of 10 
 1.2. Model and st orage  
 
The approved  laboratory notebook model should be  sewn and hardbound, and 
substantially  identical for all personnel at a given site .  One suitable example of an approved 
laboratory notebook is  Boorum & Pease Record Book, Record Ruled, 10 -3/8" x 8 -1/8" Size, 
300 Pages (21 -300-R) or its equivalent .  Each laboratory notebook shall have a unique 
alphanumerical identifier assigned  (further discussed below) , either embossed on the exterior 
covering  or marked in permanent ink on the interior cover .   
 
A supply of l aboratory  books should be maintained  by the Director or Vice President  
(VP)  of R&D of the respective R&D/ Innovati on site .  Each person(s) assigned to a given 
notebook is responsible for the safe keeping, maintenance , and archiving  thereof.  
 
1.3. Attribution and classification  
 
The VP of R&D or Director of the Mane R&D/Innovation site  is responsible for creating  
and maintain ing a Laboratory Notebook Log  for recording the assignment of laboratory 
notebooks to personnel.   The assignment of each  laboratory note book  is entered into the 
Laboratory Notebook Log by associating the laboratory notebook's unique al phanumerical 
identifier with at least one  individual , who is responsible for its maintenance  and safekeeping . 
 
A laboratory notebook 's unique alphanumerical identifier shall comprise  a mixture of 
letters and numbers .  Letters are used  to designate the MANE group company  (e.g., MINC 
for Mane, Inc. in USA; MSEA for Mane Sea in Singapore ; KCOR for KANCOR 
INGREDIENT S LIMITED  in India etc... ).  For  the numerical portion of the identifier, at 
least three digits  should  correspond to the sequence number of opening of the laboratory 
notebook , and two digits correspond ing to the year of assignment should be set apart from the 
previous digits with a forwar d slash (/) (ex: MUSA -001/17 , MMEX -014/17 , PTMI -008/17, 
etc.). 
 
The unique alphanumerical identifier  may be  embossed on the note book 's exterior and/or 
recorded in permanent ink inside the front cover .  Further, this unique alphanumerical 
identifier should be entered  on the first page  of experiments , and on all subsequent  pages that 
begin a new program, a new test , new experiment, etc.  
 
On the  inside cover of the laboratory notebook, the following information must be 
entered : 
 The exact  (legal entity)  Company Name (e.g., PT MANE INDONESIA ). 
 The section  (department)  information (e.g., Flavors, Applications, etc.) . 
 The control number  (i.e., the unique identifier assigned to that book) . 
 The name of the person  to wh om the lab oratory  notebook  has been assigned . 
 Signature of the person , which acknowledges the receipt thereof.  
 The date of  issuance . 
 The date of the last entry . 
 The control number of the previously used laboratory notebook , if applicable.  
 The control number of the next used laborat ory notebook , if applicable.  
 The name of the person who assigned the notebook . 
 The total number of pages of data entered . 
 
 Additionally, inside the front and back covers shall be place d a stamp specifying t he MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 4 of 10 
 ownership of the laboratory notebook, by speci fically identifying  the name of the MANE 
group subsidiary/affiliate and its contact information (e.g., address, telephone  and fax  
numbers ). 
 
Note 1: Example:  
 
This laboratory notebook  is the exclusive property of the company:  
Mane, Inc., a subsidiary of V. MANE FILS , located at:  
2501 Henkle Drive  
Lebanon, OH 45036  
PH: 513-248-9876  
FAX: 513 -248-8808  
 
Note 2 : While it  is permissible to allot a single laboratory notebook  to more than one 
person (e.g., a team or department ), this p ractice should be reserved only for temporary 
workers, such as interns  or trainees .  If necessary, at the time of the opening of this lab 
notebook , one person  (e.g., a supervisor ) is designated  as the assignee, where t he first 
page is filled out with info rmation which corresponds to this person .  Each contributor  
(intern or trainee)  making entries into the laboratory notebook  must be identified .  A 
listing of the contributors, along with their respective handwritten signatures, needs to be 
prepared on the page following the LABORATORY RECORDKEEPING PROCEDURES 
near the front of the laboratory notebook.  
 
The operating instructions for making entries into  the laboratory  notebook , which are  
printed at the  beginning p ages of the laboratory notebook, as well as reproduced at the end of 
this policy , must be known to every contributor  writing entries into a laboratory notebook .  
By signing, each contributor to the laboratory notebook  attests to  having read these 
instructions , and agrees  to comply with the rules and principles defined  therein . 
 
1.4. Property and confidentiality  
 
The laboratory notebooks  and their contents remain, in all circumstances, the exclusive 
property of  the MANE group .  The laboratory notebooks and their content are sub jected to an 
obligation of co nfidentiality and cannot  be disclosed  to a third without express authorization 
of an authorized  representative of MANE General Management . 
 
Until the  return  of the laboratory notebook  to the VP of R&D  (or Director)  for archiving 
or filing , the duty of preserving the integrity of  the laboratory notebooks  remains with t he 
laboratory notebook assignee .  The originally -assigned holder of a notebook will be able to 
maintain possession of their laboratory notebooks as a long time as there is a need, but no 
longer than 3 years from the date of last entry .  In the event of termination of employment,  
the laboratory notebook assignee shall  immediately surrender  each laboratory notebook in 
his/her possession to his/ her supervi sor, the VP of  R&D , or Director , who will assume  
responsib ility for archiving  the surrendered notebook(s) . 
 
2. Instructions for Recording  Information  
 
Generally speaking , the person performing the research and development activity  records 
his/her work prog ressively in the assigned l aboratory  notebook (work hypotheses , methods 
and mean s used, results obtained, conclusions  drawn ...), in a sufficiently complete , clear and MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 5 of 10 
 precise  way to enable allow a person having ordinary skill in the relevant art , to reproduc e 
recorded  work and to obtain at least similar results.  
 
2.1. General R ules Regarding  Form 
 
 Preferably, t he language of the lab oratory note book is English , but French or 
Spanish may be acceptable alternatives depending on the location of the Mane 
Innovation center . 
 The information is recorded directly in the laboratory booklet, dated ( using two 
digits for the day, at least three letters to uniquely identify the month , and four 
digits for the year, e.g., 20 MAY 2017  or 05 NOV 2017 ), and referen ced with its  
company project  name or  number and/ or an internal reference specific to the 
researcher . 
 The recording of handwritten information is done directly and only on the printed 
lines of the pages of the notebook, respecting the full width of the pages.  
 The insertion  of information near the internal margin is to be avoided, as 
information may be difficult to capture accurately during scanning . 
 
Note 3 : If the need for a later entry or amendment arises, it is  advisable to use unmarked  
section  of the page  immediately below, and particularly point  out the passage (s) 
concerned.  Where no such unmarked section  is available, one should make the 
entry/amendment on a subsequent page , and record the subsequent page number on the 
instant page.  An arrow, asterisk , etc. can be used to precisely identify the section being 
amended or corrected . 
 
 Record ing data can also be carried out by means of inserting  preprinted information  in the  
notebook (for example, typed reports, diagrams, diagrams, output datum of equipment of 
analysis, photographs, etc.).  The preprinted information should  not exceed the dimensions of 
the page, nor cover any information already entered on the page. Transparent tape or other 
adhesive should be utilized to affix the insert ed information  to the  page surface.  
 
 For t wo successive inserts , the second must be affixed  below the other (or on two 
successive pages) and not side by side.   Each  taped or glued insert  must be signed and dated 
by both the writer  and the witness (each signature should  traverse at least one of the seams 
between the insert  and the support page).   Other than the aforementioned dates and 
signatures, no other handw ritten annotations on the insert are permitted .   
 
Note  4: If there is a need to annotate information on an ins ert (e.g., for reasons of 
clarity), the "original" preprinted copy  must be annotated  first and  then photocopied; the 
corresponding photocopy is then adhered to the surface of the note book  page . 
 
Note  5: It is not necessary to integrate every piece of data  in the laboratory notebook . 
For example, if the data set is too large, the writer can also create alternative archives 
for the data ( e.g., an electronic database of HPLC chromatographs) , and simply 
reference the corresponding file number . 
 
Note  6: Rather than the original of an experimental material, a photograph or a digitized 
reproduction may be used, such as in the case of a thin -layer chromatography plate, a 
gel, a membrane , an autoradiography , or a thermosensitive ticket.  
 MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 6 of 10 
 Significant blank s paces between two information entries (for example, successions of 
blank lines, page breaks, pages left blank) or to the right of an insert, mus t be crossed out by 
means of a "Z", so that no information may be  subsequently added .  The removal of any 
labora tory noteb ook page is strictly prohibited, as doing so may jeopardize the integrity of the 
entire notebook . 
 
All handwritten entries shall  be made using permanent  ink.  There is no restriction on the 
choice of ink colors to be used, provided that the recorded information remains fully legible 
and comprehensible in full, after black and white reproduction using a standard photocopier.   
Black or dark blue inks are recommend ed.  The use of erasable ink, pencil , or "white 
correction fluid" is not allowed.  The texts and entries must be legible (any erasure must be 
referred to and dated, both by the editor and the witness).  
 
Any coding of information using specific colors shoul d be avoided.  If the use of colors 
cannot be avoi ded, the selection of colors and/ or textures must be made with careful 
consideration  of a possible need for subsequent reproduction  using a  standard photocopier  in 
black and white . 
 
On each page containing an entry , the name of the project and  laboratory notebook 
number must be entered in the designated location at the top of  the page.  
 
2.2. General R ules Regarding S ubstance  
 
Each test, experiment, or analysis , whether positive or negative, must be recorded in the 
laboratory record.  Care should be taken to ensure that the following elements are clearly and 
precisely stated:  
 
 The context in which the work was carr ied out, the objectives set and/ or the 
problem to be so lved, the working hypotheses, etc.;  
 The experimental conditions used (protocols, particular pa rameters and material 
used ...);  and 
 The results obtained, their possible interpretation, as well as any ideas, reflectio ns 
or comments relating thereto.  
 
Note 7 :  If a protocol has already been previously described, in the sa me or different 
laboratory notebook, it is not necessary to reproduce the  entire information for a new 
entry.  Rather, it is sufficient to simply reference the previous occurrence with 
particularity, i.e., the laboratory notebook numb er and page(s) concerned  along with the 
name of its author .  All modification s, changes, or adaptations to the referenced 
information must be sufficiently described .  Referencing  scientific  publications or books is 
permiss ible if identified  unambi guously  using a full bibliographical citation . 
 
Abbreviations may be used.  However, abbreviations that are non-standard to person s 
having ordinary skill in the relevant field m ust be defined at their first appearance .  Further, 
abbreviations , along with their definition , should also be recorded after the table of 
contents/index section at the front of the laboratory notebook . 
 
Note 8 :  It is possible to create a  separate  laboratory notebook  specifically  reserved  for 
recording standard laborato ry or testing procedures and protocols, abbreviations, etc., and 
then make  an appropriate  reference to this separate laboratory notebook .  MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 7 of 10 
 2.3. Require d Duties of Author and Witness  
 
Each laboratory notebook must be regularly submitted to a witness review process. 
Witnesses are Mane employees having the ability or background to understand the invention. 
For example, if the invention involves advanced chemical or electronic concepts, the witness 
must possess adequate background in the releva nt field.  If called upon later, the witness must 
be able to testify to their own knowledge that the facts of the entry are correct.  However, the 
witness must not have the status of co -author (joint researcher) of the recorded information, 
nor should the witness be able to be considered as co -inventor of any invention resulting from 
all or part of the experimental information.  Accordingly, the witness should not be a 
collaborator on the same/similar projects as the drafter. Preferably, the witness will be  chosen 
from another team or department.  
 
a. Duties of the author:  
 
 Each page  must be dated.  
 Each page of the laboratory book, as soon as it is completed, must be dated 
and signed by the author , in the  space designat ed for this purpose.  
 Any mistakes or crossed -out entries , as soon as they appear in the laboratory 
book, mu st be dated and signed by the author . 
 Do not  insert  any information (including correction s) in a corner of a page 
(even if that page has not yet been countersigned  by a witness).  
 If any  error  or mistake is  identified , the erroneous  informa tion should be 
clearly identified and corrected in a space immediately below the error.  If 
there is no available space or the available space is insufficient, then 
corrections may be made on a subseque nt page (with an appropriate forward 
reference on the page bearing the erroneous information ).  If the  date on which 
the error was found and/or corrected is different from the origin date, said 
correction d ate should be properly recorded .  
 Unused lines or space at the bottom of the page should be crossed out using a 
"Z" marking.  
 In order to certify the reality of the recording, the author  must have a witness 
sign each of the pages of his laboratory notebook within a maximum of 4 
weeks after the writing of e ach of these pages.  
 No new information or data integration can be entered  onto any page that has 
been already signed by a witness.  
 
b. Duties of the witness : 
 
 Read the information entered by the author/researcher  to evaluate whether the 
level of detail is sufficient to enable its reproduction by another having 
ordinary skill in the relevant art .  
 Co-sign all taped or glued inserts.  The date and signature must be affixed 
astride the insert and its supporting page surface.  
 Verify the quality  of the information with regard to compliance with Mane' s 
Laboratory Notebook Policy, along with laboratory recordkeeping procedures 
found at the front of the laboratory notebook itself .  
 
 
 MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 8 of 10 
 By the words " READ AND UNDERSTOOD ", the witness att ests that  his/her  duties have 
been performed and then  affixes his/her signature  in the adjacent space reserved for that 
purpose .  By this signature, the witness does not express agreement with respect to its 
technical content.  The witness shall not be  responsible for any errors or inaccuracies in the 
recorded technical data and information that may be subsequently noted.      
 
Should the witness deem  the information  insufficient  for understanding,  or finds error (s) 
with the form or manner of recording the information in the laboratory notebook , the witness 
shall inform the author .  Corrective measures must be taken by the author (or supervisor) to 
address the insufficiency or error(s) .  After clarification/correction,  the witness may  complete 
his/her duties  by applying the witness  signature  and date on  the page . 
 
The witness may  only review  pages  that have been filled  in their entirety .  Accordingly, 
unused lines or space above the signature blocks need to be properly addressed by the author  
(possibly with o ne or more "Z" marks to mark spaces left empty).  
 
3. Certification  
 
The holder /assignee  of a laboratory notebook must have it certif ied, twice a year at the 
time of certification sessions organized in May and November , by a member of Mane's Legal 
and IP Department .  All laboratory notebook s, in progress or completed , must be submitted to 
the Legal and IP Department  on the working day immediately  preceding the certification  
date. Prior to this submission, the holder of a laboratory notebook must ensure tha t the 
information in each laboratory noteboo k is correctly recorded, including marking out any 
significant empty space (e.g., marked out with a  "Z"), updating the table of contents, as well 
as arranging for the proper witnessing of the notebook . 
 
During certificat ion, each laboratory notebook shall be  inspected with regard to 
compliance with this policy.  A t the end of this inspection,  the reviewer will make an entry 
into the laboratory notebook and notate the completed inspection by affixing the reviewer's  
stamp, date, and signature.   At the end of each certification, the notebook will be promptly 
returned to its assignee , ideally no later than  the next working day after  certification.  
 
For remote Innovation sites without a local or regional representative from MANE's 
Legal and IP Department,  arrangements will be made based on the volume of laboratory 
notebooks to enable completion of the cer tification process  without undue expense of time or 
resources . 
 
4. Archiving  
 
Each person a ssigned to a laboratory  notebook is responsible for the  maintenance of the 
notebook while it is in his/her possession .  The assigned person  (or holder) must ensure that 
each assigned laboratory book (s) is  stored  in a safe and secure location  to prevent loss, theft , 
or degradation.  If a laboratory notebook is lost, stolen, or damaged, the assigned person shall 
immediat ely notify his/her supervisor .  The holder and supervisor shall immediately prepare a 
report detailing the circumstances leading to the loss, theft, or degradation, an d the completed 
report is to be submitted to the Legal and IP Department for review and investigation . 
 
Prior to preserving an electronic copy of a laboratory notebook, the holder must ensure MANE LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artment  October 27, 2017  Page 9 of 10 
 that 1) the content of the notebook meet s the standards set fort h in this policy , and 2) the 
notebook is certified (per Section 3 above).   Once a notebook is complete and certified, the 
holder should make arrangements with the VP of R&D to begin the laboratory notebook 
scanning/archiving process.  After securing an ele ctronic archival copy of the laboratory 
notebook, the original hardcopy will be returned to its originally assigned holder for a 
reasonable period, which shall not exceed three (3) years from the date of last entry .   
 
After  the reasonable retention period , the original hardcopy of the laboratory notebook 
will be turned in to the VP of R&D  (or site Director) , who will arrange for long term storage 
of the notebook  within a fire resistant container at the local Mane Innovation site, such as a 
fire resistant s afe utilized by Accounting or Human Resource departments .   
 Appendix:    Laboratory Recordkeeping Procedures  
 
Mane Legal & IP Dep artmen t  October 27, 2017  Page 10 of 10 
 
General Instruction  
Laboratory Notebooks are the means for keeping a permanent record of the details of an individual's day -to-day 
work in the research and development areas.  They provide 1) a basic reference which the individual and others 
can refer to at a later date; 2) legal evidence with respect to the materials recorded, such as conception of an 
invention and date thereof or date of  reduction to practice and test results; and 3) in some instances, compliance 
with the provisions of many contractual arrangements.  
Instructions for Recording Data in the Laboratory Notebook  
1. All entries should be made in a legible and orderly manner usi ng permanent ink, preferably black.  Make entries 
clear and complete, that someone else could repeat the experiment.  
2. Avoid erasures.  If an error is made, cross it out and make the correction immediately thereafter.  Cancellations 
or insertions should be i nitialed, dated, and explained by an appropriate notation.  
3. Make sure control page is filled out prior to usage.  
4. Complete the table of contents as you make entries in the notebook.  
5. State the object and results of each experiment clearly and concisely.  Give  a complete, factual, and self -
explanatory account of the progress of the work and the procedure followed (reference to earlier work done by 
yourself or another may be accomplished by noting a previous page of the same notebook or the page and 
number of an  earlier notebook).  Describe and give quantities of all materials used.  Explain all code numbers 
and abbreviations.  
6. An entry dealing with a conception (invention, idea) must describe the thing conceived.  (Example, whether it is 
a chemical compound , a co mbination of a compound and a solvent, etc.) as well as the utility for the ting 
conceived, how it is to be used and the method(s) by which it is to be prepared, including equivalent materials 
which could be used.  Statements with regard to utility should be stated positively.  Work toward practical 
implementation of an invention should start as soon as possible in a notebook.  
7. Negative or deprecatory entries should be avoided.  (Example:  A reaction gives a 2% yield was expected.  Do 
not state "Process does  not work".)  Phraseology which expresses an opinion rather than a positive statement 
and gratuitous comments should be avoided.  This is not an instruction to omit the conclusion of an experiment 
which had less than the expected results.  Be factual.  
8. Each  day's work should, whenever possible, be started on a separate page with lines drawn down angularly 
across the unused portion of the previous page. (This gives legal evidence that additions were not made at a later 
date.)  It is permissible, as stated abo ve, to make reference to an earlier page by reciting "Continued from page 
...".  It is extremely important that each page show the date of entry.  
9. Each page must be signed and dated by the individual who makes the entry and does the work.  In addition, each 
page must be witnessed (signed and dated), using the notation "Read and Understood", preferably on the same 
day, but at least within one week.  The witness should not be connected with the conception, should not have 
taken part in the experimental work per formed by another, but should understand the technical filed of the entry.  
Record Laboratory Notebook Number and project on each page.  
10. Where a conception is made by two or more individuals, it need only be entered in the notebook of one, but 
must be signe d and dated by all the conceivers.  Ideally, all conceivers should sign on the same day.  
11. For microfilming purposes, graphs, charts, analytical data, etc. must be attached to the notebook pages with a 
permanent adhesive and should, when unfolded, be kept wi thin the confines of the opened notebook. NO 
ENTRIES SHOULD BE MADE ON THE PAGE BENEATH ATTACHED SHEETS AND NOTHING MUST 
BE OBSCURED.  Leave the heading on the top and the space provided for the witnessing signature at the 
bottom of each page exposed.  Ins erts should be signed and dated by the person making the entry and witnessed 
by another to provide the best legal evidence.  If materials such as spectra, graphs, etc. are not kept in the 
notebook, they must be signed, dated and identified in such a manner  as to provide a reference back to the 
pertinent page(s) of the Laboratory Notebook itself.  
12. Report the loss or theft of a research notebook.  
13. Following the use of all the pages of each notebook, it must be sent to the Library for record maintenance.  
Make s ure table of contents pages are complete.  After it has been recorded it will be returned to the individual.  
An individual may retain in his possession the Laboratory Notebook immediately preceding the one in which  
entries are currently being made.  Norma lly, all other Laboratory Notebooks will be kept on file in the Library 
or in vault storage.  They may then be checked out for reasonable lengths of time by authorized individuals.  
 
Instructions read and included/understood by:  
Date:  
Signature:  PATENTING PROCESS 
Frequently Asked Questions 
 
 
MANE Legal & IP Department 2 February 2021 Page 1 of 3 
 This document of FAQs serves as a brief introduction to the basic process for securing 
patent rights. It is intended to provide only a short introduction to the patenting process at 
MANE.  Any specific questions should be referred to MANE's Legal and IP Department . 
 
For more general information on patents and patent rights, see our general FAQ: 
https://mosscorp.emea.sesam.mane.com/LegalIP/IP/Patents%20useful%20information/
FAQs . 
 
1. How is a patent application created? 
At MANE, the patenting process begins with obtaining approval for a Patentability Study 
from one of the following committees: 
ComInnov  - Innovation, Valorization and Transfer Committee - SP-DG-001/01 
ComSci - Conception, Development and Industrialization Committee - SP-DS-001/04 
 
2. What information is necessary for initiating a patentability study? 
The purpose of a patentability study is to assess the likelihood of obtaining a granted 
patent having meaningful protection.  Thus, in order to assess patentability of a new 
product or process, the inventors/contributors must provide patent counsel with specific 
details of the product or process, including an explanation of the technical problem being 
solved, successful and unsuccessful experiments, known prior art, and how the new 
product or process is different from old or known products or processes. 
 
After studying the provided details, the new product or process is defined by one or more 
hypothetical claims, which are then evaluated by comparing the hypothetical claim(s) to 
the prior art.  Prior art is any evidence (information) that the invention was already publicly 
known or available, in whole or in part, before the effective filing date of the patent 
application, and includes publicly available information, such as published patent 
documents, scientific journal articles, web pages, technical data sheets, etc.    
 
3. What happens after a patentability study? 
At the conclusion of the patentability study, patent counsel will prepare a final written 
patentability report, which shall include a description of the invention, the hypothetical 
claim(s), a listing of the relevant prior art document(s) found in the prior art search, and 
an analysis as to the novelty and inventiveness of the hypothetical claim(s) vis-a-vis the 
relevant prior art document(s).  The report will conclude with a recommendation to 
proceed (or not) with the preparation and filing of patent application.   
 
Because the patenting system requires disclosure of the technical details of the invention 
in exchange for a chance at obtaining patent rights, there is a risk of disclosure without 
any patent rights.  As such, in some instances and prior to making a favorable 
recommendation, R&D may be asked to perform additional testing or experiments to 
enhance MANE's chances for obtaining a granted patent.  
 
4. What is involved with preparing a patent application? 
The process for preparing a patent application involves a collaboration between patent 
counsel and the inventor(s).  Patent counsel will generally begin the process by preparing PATENTING PROCESS 
Frequently Asked Questions 
 
 
MANE Legal & IP Department 2 February 2021 Page 2 of 3 
 a set of claims describing the metes and bounds of the invention, and then build the 
remaining sections of the patent application therefrom to provide the requisite antecedent 
basis for the claims.  In order to correct any errors and/or provide missing or supplemental 
information, the initial draft application must be reviewed by the inventors. While rare at 
this stage, R&D may be asked to perform additional experiments, but only if absolutely 
necessary prior to filing.  At the end of the review/revision process, a final draft of the 
patent application must be approved by the inventor(s) prior to filing.  
 
Since the draft patent application needs to be approved by the inventor(s), another 
important piece of information that should accompany the invention disclosure is a listing 
of persons who materially contributed to the creation of the invention.  From the listing of 
contributors, MANE patent counsel will conduct an inquiry into the nature of each 
contributor's involvement and make a legal determination as to whose contribution rises 
to the level of "inventorship."  It is globally accepted that an inventor must have contributed 
to the conception of some aspect of the inventive features (i.e., novel and/or non-obvious) 
of the invention.  Conception, which is the key to inventorship, may be defined as the 
formation in the mind of an inventor of a definite and permanent idea of the complete and 
operative invention as it is thereafter put into practice.  And because inventions are 
defined by the claims, an inventor must be able to point to at least one element in at least 
one claim that (s)he conceived.  Additionally, those claim element(s) must be one of the 
inventive elements.   
 
To be co-inventors, the contributions of each person need not be equal or the same.  All 
that is required is collaboration and contribution to the conception of at least one of the 
claims in the patent application.  Please note that being present during a meeting, 
providing research support, setting up experiments at the instruction of another, or 
sensory/analytical testing, does not by itself indicate a contribution to the conception of 
the invention. 
 
5. What parts make up a patent application?  
Since a patent application serves to provide a written description describing and enabling 
others to practice and use the invention, the inventors must provide patent counsel with 
sufficient details to create the application.  The detailed invention disclosure provided to 
patent counsel will be used to create the basic parts (sections) of a patent application, 
which include Title, Abstract, Background, Summary of the Invention, Brief 
Description of the Drawings (if applicable), Detailed Description of the Invention, 
and the Claims.   
   
6. Where is the initial patent application filed? 
The initial filing (or so-called "priority filing") is typically performed where the invention is 
made.  
 
7. What happens after a patent application is filed? 
The filing of a patent application is not the end of the process, but really the beginning of 
a formal examination process.  Moreover, it is necessary to make decisions regarding the 
filing of one or more foreign patent applications. PATENTING PROCESS 
Frequently Asked Questions 
 
 
MANE Legal & IP Department 2 February 2021 Page 3 of 3 
  
Under the Paris Convention (an international treaty created in 1883 requiring member 
countries to adopt certain minimum protections for industrial property), the priority filing 
permits the applicant to file one or more corresponding patent application in additional 
countries, within 12 months from the priority filing date.   
 
Under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which is another international treaty 
concluded in 1970, a single filing of a PCT application may be made with a Receiving 
Office (RO) in one language.  A PCT application does not itself result in the grant of a 
patent, since there is no such thing as an "international patent."  Instead, a PCT 
application serves to establish a filing date in all contracting states, and must be followed 
up one or more national or regional phase applications to proceed towards grant of one 
or more patents. The PCT procedure essentially leads to a standard national or regional 
patent application, which may be granted or rejected according to applicable law, in each 
jurisdiction in which a patent is desired.  If a PCT application is desired, then it must be 
filed within 12 months from the priority filing date, i.e., the same deadline under the Paris 
Convention. However, the deadline for filing National Phase applications from the PCT 
application varies from member states, but is generally 30 months from the priority filing 
date.  So, in essence, the PCT serves as a mechanism to delay the decision for filing 
patent applications from 12 months to about 30 months, but only in the 153 member 
countries. 
 
In each jurisdiction, the claims of the patent application are evaluated for clarity, novelty, 
and inventiveness.  
 
After 18 months from the earliest priority date, the application publishes and thus the 
invention is available to the public. 
 
8. What to expect during examination of a patent application? 
The examination of a patent application begins with an examiner reviewing the clarity, 
novelty, and inventiveness of the claims vis-a-vis the prior art.  The examiner then issues 
an office action, which in most cases includes a rejection/objection of one or more of the 
pending claims.  An applicant is given a limited period of time (e.g., 3-4 months) to 
respond to the office action, which may include arguments, claim amendments, and/or 
evidence supporting the patentability of the pending claims. 
 
Depending on the nature of the rejection/objection, the inventor(s) may be consulted for 
technical input to assist patent counsel with developing claim amendments/rebuttal 
arguments to overcome the examiner's rejection(s)/objection(s). Ideally, the inventor(s) 
should also be aware of what embodiments are being utilized in MANE's commercial 
product/process.  Thus, this collaboration between patent counsel and the inventor(s) 
should provide MANE the best opportunity to obtain commercially-relevant granted 
patents. 
 
 PATENTS 
Frequently Asked Questions 
Mane Legal & IP Department June 19 2020    Page 1 of 1   
This document of FAQs serves as a brief introduction to patent rights. It is intended to provide a short introduction to the 
basics. Any specific questions should be referred to MANE's Legal and IP Department. 
 
1. What is a patent? 
A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or a process that provides, in general, a new way 
of doing something, or offers a new technical solution to a problem. A few exemplary inventions include 1) a new process 
for making seamless capsules, 2) a new fragrance molecule, or 3) a new composition that blocks bitterness taste of high 
intensity sweeteners. 
 
Patent protection means an invention cannot be commercially made, used, distributed or sold without the patent owner's 
consent. Patent rights are usually enforced in courts that, in most systems, hold the authority to stop patent infringement. 
Conversely, a court can also declare a patent invalid upon a successful challenge by a third party. 
 
2. What is patentable? 
An invention must, in general, fulfill the following conditions to be protected by a patent.  
1. Industrially applicable (useful): It must be of practical use. 
2. New: It must show an element of "novelty", meaning some new characteristic that is not part of the body of existing 
knowledge in its particular technical field. That body of existing knowledge is called "prior art".  
3. Inventive (not obvious):  It must show an "inventive step" that is not obvious or routine by a person with average 
knowledge of the technical field.  
 
The subject matter of the invention must also be accepted as "patentable" under the patent laws of a given county. In many 
countries, scientific theories, mathematical methods, plant or animal varieties, discoveries of natural substances, 
commercial methods or methods of medical treatment (as opposed to medical products) are not generally patentable. For 
example abstract ideas (Einstein's equation E=mc2), laws of nature (gravity), or natural occurring phenomena (a chemical 
found in nature) are not patentable, but specific applications of these things could be patentable. 
 
3. How long does a patent last? 
Patent rights may last for up to 20 years, IF renewal or maintenance fees are paid in a timely manner. 
 
4. Which countries are covered by a patent?  
Patents are granted by national patent offices or by regional offices that carry out examination work for a group of countries 
- for example, the European Patent Office (EPO) and the African Intellectual Property Organization (OAPI). Under such 
regional systems, an applicant requests protection for an invention in one or more countries, and each country decides 
whether to offer patent protection within its borders.  
 
The WIPO-administered Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) provides for the filing of a single international patent application 
that has the same effect as national applications filed in the designated countries. However, in order to obtain a patent in a 
PCT member nation, a patent application must be filed and prosecuted in the PCT member nation. 
 
5. What is patent infringement?  
Patent infringement is the commission of a prohibited act with respect to a patented invention without permission from the 
patent holder. Permission may typically be granted in the form of a license. The definition of patent infringement may vary 
by jurisdiction, but it typically includes using or selling the patented invention. In many countries, a use is required to be 
commercial (or to have a commercial purpose) to constitute patent infringement. The scope of the patented invention or the 
extent of protection is defined in the claims of the granted patent. In other words, the terms of the claims inform the public 
of what is not allowed without the permission of the patent holder. 
 
Patents are territorial, and infringement is only possible in a country where a patent is in force. 
 
 
6. What do I do if I think I have an invention? 
Do not disclose your invention to anyone outside of the company, and contact Mane's Legal and IP Department. 
 GLOBAL LABORATORY 
NOTEBOOK POLICY
CONFIDENTIAL November 2017
2GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 201701
Importance of Laboratory NotebooksCONTENT
US Case law citing use of lab notebooks02
Notebook and Methods 03
Review, Certification, and Archival 
Process043GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017
IMPORTANCE OF LABORATORY NOTEBOOKS4GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017IMPORTANCE OF LABORATORY NOTEBOOKS
The primary purpose of a laboratory notebook is to preserve and protect intellectual property rights in 
all new and improved products, processes, or equipment by serving as a record and archive for all 
research and development work (ideas, experiments, formulations, etc.). 
A properly executed laboratory notebook may be used as legal evidencewith respect to various 
aspects of the new or improved methods/products, such as conception and/or reduction to practice 
of an invention and date(s) corresponding thereto, test results, and the like.
*A chronological record and the primary document of a person's work in a research laboratory.
*A complete record of procedures, reagents, data, and scientific interpretations and hypotheses to 
pass on to other researchers.
*A document that records factual details of experiments, including thought experiments, ideas, 
inventions, etc.5GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017IMPORTANCE OF LABORATORY NOTEBOOKS
It is Critical and Required! 
*Recording what you did, so you or others can repeat the experiments. 
*Good records make it easier to publish or share results. 
*Troubleshooting: help find mistakes, bad materials, etc. 
*Legal document for evidence in patent and trade secret matters. 
*Defense against accusations of fraud or lawsuits 
Your data should be able to be explained, defended, reconstructed, or repeated without your 
assistance. 6GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017
US CASE LAW CITING USE OF LAB 
NOTEBOOKS7GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017US CASE LAW
Since 2012, over 30 federal cases have been decided where laboratory notebooks were 
amongst the evidence considered by the court and referenced in the court's opinion.
Used as evidence to show:
*Conception date of an invention
*Reduction to practice date of an embodiment of an invention
*Date of first observation or discovery of a new polymorph
*Date that a research idea was shared with a colleague (who later tried to patent himself)
Notable excerpts:
*"an unwitnessed entry in an inventor's laboratory notebook was insufficient, without more, to 
corroborate the inventor's testimony that he had conceived of the invention." 
*"... whiteboard photos are analogous to the unwitnessed pages of a laboratory notebook 
and would therefore likely be insufficient on their own to corroborate inventor's testimony of 
prior conception."
*"...had not signed his laboratory notebook for nine months, then curiously signed his 
notebook..."8GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017
NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 9GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 
What to record for an experiment? 
Start Date 
Title 
Why: Rationale, hypothesis, objectives 
Methods (Plan): 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) with references 
Planned protocol modification, why, and approval 
Calculations: MW, concentrations, dilutions, formula, ... 
What Happened (Realities): 
Sample preparation 
Experiment /test conditions; 
Results, including unexpected results or observations 
Document critical events to prove compliance with SOPs 
What It Means: 
Result interpretation, including comments on oddities 
Potential uses 
What's Next:  Future plans 
Ideas, hints and tips: Use notebook as a repository of creativity 10GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 
2.1. General Rules Regarding Form
Preferably, the language of the laboratory notebook is English, but French or Spanish may be 
acceptable alternatives depending on the location of the Mane Innovation center.
The information is recorded directly in the laboratory booklet, dated (using two digits for the 
day, at least three letters to uniquely identify the month , and four digits for the year, e.g., 20 
MAY 2017 or 05 NOV 2017), and referenced with its company project name or number 
and/or an internal reference specific to the researcher.
The recording of handwritten information is done directly and only on the printed lines of the 
pages of the notebook, respecting the full width of the pages.
The insertion of information near the internal margin is to be avoided, as information may be 
difficult to capture accurately during scanning.
Note 3: If the need for a later entry or amendment arises, it is advisable to use unmarked section of the page 
immediately below, and particularly point out the passage(s) concerned. Where no such unmarked 
section is available, one should make the entry/amendment on a subsequent page, and record the 
subsequent page number on the instant page. An arrow, asterisk, etc. can be used to precisely 
identify the section being amended or corrected.11GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 
Recording data can also be carried out by means of inserting preprinted information in the 
notebook (for example, typed reports, diagrams, diagrams, output datum of equipment of 
analysis, photographs, etc.). The preprinted information should not exceed the dimensions of 
the page, nor cover any information already entered on the page. Transparent tape or 
other adhesive should be utilized to affix the inserted information to the page surface.
For two successive inserts, the second must be affixed below the other (or on two successive 
pages) and not side by side. Each taped or glued insert must be signed and dated by both 
the writer and the witness (each signature should traverse at least one of the seams between 
the insert and the support page). Other than the aforementioned dates and signatures, no 
other handwritten annotations on the insert are permitted.
Note 4: If there is a need to annotate information on an insert (e.g., for reasons of clarity), the "original" 
preprinted copy must be annotated first and then photocopied; the corresponding photocopy is then 
adhered to the surface of the notebook page.
Note 5: It is not necessary to integrate every piece of data in the laboratory notebook. For example, if the 
data set is too large, the writer can also create alternative archives for the data (e.g., an electronic 
database of HPLC chromatographs), and simply reference the corresponding file number.
Note 6: Rather than the original of an experimental material, a photograph or a digitized reproduction may 
be used, such as in the case of a thin-layer chromatography plate, a gel, a membrane, an 
autoradiography, or a thermosensitive ticket.12GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 
Supplemental Materials 
Examples of information that could be inserted (taped) into a notebook: 
Computer-generated data 
Datasheet templates 
E-mails
Notes of discussions and conversations 
Photographs 
Printed graphs 
Product labels 
Related papers and readings 
If too large to fit, items may be kept in a separate folder Always record date 
and other identifying information 
Provide "links" to equipment logbooks, data on computers, other notebooks, 
journal references, etc13GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 
Significant blank spaces between two information entries (for example, successions of blank 
lines, page breaks, pages left blank) or to the right of an insert, must be crossed out by 
means of a "Z", so that no information may be subsequently added. The removal of any 
laboratory notebook page is strictly prohibited, as doing so may jeopardize the integrity of 
the entire notebook.
All handwritten entries shall be made using permanent ink. There is no restriction on the 
choice of ink colors to be used, provided that the recorded information remains fully legible 
and comprehensible in full, after black and white reproduction using a standard 
photocopier.
Black or dark blue inks are recommended. The use of erasable ink, pencil, or "white 
correction fluid" is not allowed. The texts and entries must be legible (any erasure must be 
referred to and dated, both by the editor and the witness).
Any coding of information using specific colors should be avoided. If the use of colors 
cannot be avoided, the selection of colors and/or textures must be made with careful 
consideration of a possible need for subsequent reproduction using a standard photocopier 
in black and white.
On each page containing an entry, the name of the project and laboratory notebook 
number must be entered in the designated location at the top of the page.14GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 
2.2. General Rules Regarding Substance
Each test, experiment, or analysis, whether positive or negative, must be recorded in the 
laboratory record. Care should be taken to ensure that the following elements are clearly and
precisely stated:
The context in which the work was carried out, the objectives set and/or the problem to be 
solved, the working hypotheses, etc.;
The experimental conditions used (protocols, particular parameters and material used ...); 
and
The results obtained, their possible interpretation, as well as any ideas, reflections or 
comments relating thereto.
Abbreviations may be used. However, abbreviations that are non-standard to persons having 
ordinary skill in the relevant field must be defined at their first appearance. Further, 
abbreviations, along with their definition, should also be recorded after the table of 
contents/index section at the front of the laboratory notebook.15GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 
Note 7: If a protocol has already been previously described, in the same or different laboratory 
notebook, it is not necessary to reproduce the entire information for a new entry. Rather, it is 
sufficient to simply reference the previous occurrence with particularity, i.e., the laboratory 
notebook number and page(s) concerned along with the name of its author. All modifications, 
changes, or adaptations to the referenced information must be sufficiently described. 
Referencing scientific publications or books is permissible if identified unambiguously using a full 
bibliographical citation.
Note 8: It is possible to create a separate laboratory notebook specifically reserved for recording 
standard laboratory or testing procedures and protocols, abbreviations, etc., and then make 
an appropriate reference to this separate laboratory notebook.16GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017Duties of the author:
Each page must be dated.
Each page of the laboratory book, as soon as it is completed, must be dated and signed by 
the author, in the space designated for this purpose.
Any mistakes or crossed-out entries, as soon as they appear in the laboratory book, must be 
dated and signed by the author.
Do not insert any information (including corrections) in a corner of a page (even if that page 
has not yet been countersigned by a witness).
If any error or mistake is identified, the erroneous information should be clearly identified and 
corrected in a space immediately below the error. If there is no available space or the 
available space is insufficient, then corrections may be made on a subsequent page (with 
an appropriate forward reference on the page bearing the erroneous information). If the 
date on which the error was found and/or corrected is different from the origin date, said 
correction date should be properly recorded.
Unused lines or space at the bottom of the page should be crossed out using a "Z" marking.
In order to certify the reality of the recording, the author must have a witness sign each of 
the pages of his laboratory notebook within a maximum of 4 weeks after the writing of each 
of these pages.
No new information or data integration can be entered onto any page that has been 
already signed by a witness.NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 17GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017Duties of the witness:
Read the information entered by the author/researcher to evaluate whether the level of 
detail is sufficient to enable its reproduction by another having ordinary skill in the relevant 
art.
Co-sign all taped or glued inserts. The date and signature must be affixed astride the insert 
and its supporting page surface.
Verify the quality of the information with regard to compliance with Mane's Laboratory 
Notebook Policy, along with laboratory recordkeeping procedures found at the front of the 
laboratory notebook itself.NOTEBOOK AND METHODS 18GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017
REVIEW, CERTIFICATION, AND ARCHIVAL 
PROCESS19GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017REVIEW, CERTIFICATION, AND ARCHIVAL PROCESS
3. Certification
The holder/assignee of a laboratory notebook must have it certified, twice a year at the time of 
certification sessions organized in May and November, by a member of Mane's Legal and IP 
Department. 
*All laboratory notebooks, in progress or completed, must be submitted to the Legal and IP 
Department on the working day immediately preceding the certification date. 
*Prior to this submission, the holder of a laboratory notebook must ensure that the information 
in each laboratory notebook is correctly recorded, including marking out any significant 
empty space (e.g., marked out with a "Z"), updating the table of contents, as well as 
arranging for the proper witnessing of the notebook.
During certification, each laboratory notebook shall be inspected with regard to compliance 
with this policy. At the end of this inspection, the reviewer will make an entry into the notebook 
and notate the completed inspection by affixing the reviewer's stamp, date, and signature. 
At the end of each certification, the notebook will be promptly returned to its assignee, ideally 
no later than the next working day after certification. 
For remote Innovation sites, arrangements will be made based on the volume of laboratory 
notebooks to enable completion of the certification process without undue expense of time or 
resources.20GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017REVIEW, CERTIFICATION, AND ARCHIVAL PROCESS
4. Archiving
Each person assigned to a laboratory notebook is responsible for the maintenance of the
notebook while it is in his/her possession. 
*must ensure that each assigned laboratory book (s) is stored in a safe and secure location to 
prevent loss, theft, or degradation. 
*If a laboratory notebook is lost, stolen, or damaged, the assigned person shall immediately 
notify his/her supervisor. 
*Prior to preserving an electronic copy of a laboratory notebook, the holder must ensure that 
1) the content of the notebook meets the standards set forth in this policy, and 
2) The notebook is certified (per Section 3 above). 
Once a notebook is complete and certified, the holder should make arrangements with the VP 
of R&D to begin the laboratory notebook scanning/archiving process. 
After securing an electronic archival copy of the laboratory notebook, the original hardcopy will 
be returned to its originally assigned holder for a reasonable period, which shall not exceed 
three (3) years from the date of last entry.
After the reasonable retention period, VP of R&D (or site Director) will arrange for long term 
storage of the notebook within a fire resistant container at the local Mane Innovation site.21GLOBAL LABORATORY NOTEBOOK POLICY
Confidential | November 2017CONCLUDING REMARKS
QUESTIONS?FOR MORE
INFORMATION,
CONTACT US
www.mane.comJames.CAREY@mane.com
+513-239-2254



FROM (name. Mane entity & department)
ISSUANCE DATE DEADLINE REQUIRED (furgent please indicate why)
Please attach the documents relating to the innovation decision making process by the Cominney or the Scientific Committee on the project:

Innovation project opening
Project presentation to the Committee
Extract from the minutes of the Committee

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT: The purpose of a FTO study is to ensure that the commercial production, marketing and use of a new product or process does not infringe third parties' Intellectual property rights.
Please describe the project, the applications, its benefits compared to prior art if any, etc.-

DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT: A good patent search may indicate that a new product and/or process is/are unlikely to infringe third party patents, but no patent search is perfect or full proof. There is a practical limit to the time and money that can be spent on a search.
For example, for a formulation, please detail all the main components, their percentage of use.. Please specify the planned use of the composition device etc. Do not hesitate to provide more explicit documents

GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE: Patent protection is territorial. In many cases, protection is sought in a company's main markets and left in the public domain in other countries where commercialization is less likely. In the latter countries, no permission (or license) will be needed from the patent owner to commercialize the product.
By default, the FTO will be conducted for the territories of Europe and USA. If the project concerns specific countries, or there is a need to cover any other countries, in addition to or instead of Europe & USA please specify

KNOWN PRIOR ART: Patents have limits of scope and limited duration. The most important part of a patent document is probably the claims. The claims determine the scope of t patent and all aspects of an invention that are not covered by the claims are not considered to be patented. It is important to bear in mind that it is not always easy to determine the scope of patent. Patent protection lasts for a maximum period of 20 years, provided the patent is "maintained" for the entire period by timely payment of maintenance fees to the patent offices. After expiry of the term of protection, a patent is considered to be in the public domain and may be freely used by anyone.
Please indicate a list of the relevant prior art patent documents